༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
ImageGroup:
W2DB25450
70925972
11 PD36343
n/a
6343
LCCN:
ISBN:
Title:
a glossary of the tribes and castes of the punjab and north-west frontier
province
Author:
དེནཟིལ་ཨིབབཙོན་
denzil ibbetson
n/a
Descriptor:
Original Publication:
n/a;n/a
Place:
delhi
Publisher:
languages department punjab
1970
Date:
Volume:
Total Volumes:
TBRC Pages:
Introductory Pages:
Text Pages:
Scanning Information:
no II
In/a
n/a
Scanned at M/S Satluj Infotech Images, E-45, Sector 27 Noida, District Gautam Buddha
Nagar, U.P. 201301 via New Delhi, IN for the Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, 150 17th
st., New York, NY 10011, U.S.A 2006. Comments: 2008



A GLOSSARY
OF THE
TRIBES AND CASTES
OF THE
Punjab and North-West Frontier Province.
Based on the Census Report for the Punjab, 1883,
by the late Sir DENZIL IBBETSON, K.C.S.I.,
and the Census Report for the Punjab, 1892,
ensus
by the Hon. Mr. E. D. MacLAGAN, C.S.I., and
CO
compiled by H. A. ROSE.
VOL. II.
A.-K.
LANGUAGES DEPARTMENT PUNJAB
1970



Reproduced By
Director, Languages. Department, Punjab,
Through
Controller, Printing & Stationery Department,
Punjab.
.
1883
First Published
Reprinted
1970
Printed at
Punjab National Press, Delhi.
Price Rs. 13.00



GLOSSARY OF THE TRIBES AND
CASTES OF THE PUNJAB AND
N. W. F. PROVINCE.



Agents for the sale of Punjab Government
Publications.
IN LONDON.
IN INDIA.
CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta &
Leicester Square, W. C.
| Simla.
GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta.
.S. W.
R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta.
HENRY S. King & Co., 65, Cornhill,
E. C.
THACKER & Co., Bombay.
P. S. King & Son, 2 and 4, Great HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras.
Smith Street, Westminster, S. W.
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co.,
F. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta.
43, Gerrard Street, Sobo, W.
V. KALYANARAM (YER & Cu., 189,
B. QUAPITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New
Esplanade Row, Madras.
· Bond Street, W
G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras.
T. Fisher Unwin, 1, Adelphi Terrace,
SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST
W.C.
| Mission Press, Rangoon.
A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depot
W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, Office Delhi
London, E. C.
GULAB SINGH & Sons, Mufid-i-'Am
LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, Press, Lahore.
London, W.C.
MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt,
Anarkali Bazar, Lahoru
S. MUMTAZ ALI & Son, Rafah-i- 'Ain
ON THE CONTINENT. Press, Lahore [for Vernacular
Publications only].
FRIEDLANDER & Sohn, 11, Carlstrasse, MANAR. The Arvan Printing. Publish.
Berlin.
ing and General Trading Co., Limit-
Otto HARRASBOWITZ, Leipzig.
ed, Lahore.
KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig.
N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and
Proprietor, Nazair Kanun Hind
ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Press, Allahabad.
Paris.
D. B. TARAPOREVALA Sons & Co.,
MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague.
Bombay.
ir



Publisher's Note
It may look unprogressive to bring out another reprint
of a book which was first published as far back as the later years
of the nineteenth century. It is possible that lot of further
research might have taken place in this subject during the
succeeding years, yet these works maintain their own reference
value. The idea behind the present venture is to make available
these rare works to most libraries and readers.
www.
The British and other Western scholars rendered great
service to this land and their works still have great bearing on the
Language, Culture and History of the Punjab. The Languages
Department has planned to bring out reprints of the most valuable
works, including the present one, for the benefit of most readers,
scholars and research workers.
LAL SINGH
Director
Languages Department
Punjab.
Patiala
January, 1970



13
PREFACE TO VOLUME II.
This Glossary of the Tribes and Castes found in the Punjab,
the North-West Frontier Province and the Protected Territories
on the North-West Frontier of India, is based upon the works of
the late Sir Denzil Charles Jelf Ibbetson, K.C.S.I., Lieutenant-
Governor of the Punjab and its Dependencies, and of the
Hon'ble Mr. Edward Douglas Maclagan, C.S.I., now Secretary
to the Government of India in the Revenue Department. Sir
Denzil Ibbetson's Report on the Punjab Census of 1881 was
reprinted as Punjab Ethnography. Volume III of the present com.
pilation will include the rest of this Glossary, and Volume I will
comprise the valuable chapters of Sir Denzil Ibbetson's Report
which deal with the Physical Description of the Punjab, its Reli.
gions and other subjects, supplemented by the matter contained
in the Hon'ble Mr. Maclagan's Report on the Punjab Census of
1891, and from other sources.
This Glossary embodies some of the materials collected in
the Ethnographic Survey of India which was begun in 1900,
under the scheme initiated by Sir Herbert Risley, K.C.I.E.,
C.S.I., but it has no pretensions to finality. The compiler's aim
has been to collect facts and record them in the fullest possible
detail without formulating theories as to the racial elements which
have made the population of the modern Punjab, the growth of
its tribes or the evolution of caste. For information regard-
ing the various theories which have been suggested on those
topics the reader may be referred to the works of Sir Alexander
Cunningham,* Bellewt and Nesfield.
The Census Report for India, 1903, and The Races of India
may also be referred to as standard works on these subjects.
It is in contemplation to add to Volume III, or to publish as
Volume IV, a subject-index to the whole of the present work
* Archäological Survey Reports : more especially Vols. II, V and XIV for the Punjab.
Also his Ancient Geography of India, The Buidhist Periot, 1871,
+ Rices of Afghanistan and Yilsufzai,
I Brief view of the Caste System of the North-Western Provinzes and Oudh : Allahabad, 1885,



North-West Frontier Province. The practical importance of an
intensive study of the minutest data in the popular religion,
folk-lore, traditions, survivals and superstitions cannot be easily
exaggerated, and the present writer is convinced that nothing but
a closer study of them will, for example, reconcile the apparently
hopeless inconsistencies of the Punjab customary law.



GLOSSARY
OF
PUNJAB TRIBES AND CASTES.
ABAZAI, a section of the Yúsufzai Patháns, found in Buner.
ABBA KAEL, one of the six septs of the Baizai clan of the Akozai Yúsufzai
Patháns, found in Pesháwar.
ABBássi, the name of the ruling family of the Dáúdpotrás who are
Nawábs of Bahawalpur and claim descent from the Abbasside dynasty
of Egypt: see Dáúdpotrá and Kalhora.
Abdál, a small caste of Muhammadans found in Kángra and the
Jaswán Dún of Hoshiarpur. The Abdáls are divided into 12 tolis
or septs. The Abdáls of Kángra do not associate with those of
Sukhảr and Nurpur. The Abdáls are beggars and wandering
singers, performing especially at Rajput fuperals, at which they
precede the body singing and playing dirges, ben or birláp. In
the time of the Rájás when any Rájput was killed in battle and
the news reached his home, they got his clothes and used to
wear them while singing his dirge. Thus they sang dirges for
Rám Singh, wazír of Nurpur, and Shám Singh, Atáriwálá, who had
fought against the British, and for Rájá Rai Singh of Chamba.
The Abdáls now sing various songs and attend Rajput weddings.
They are endogamous. Abdál means lieutenant' (see Platts'
Hindi Dicty., s. v.) and is the name of a class of wandering
Muhammadan saints.* Whether there is any connection between
the name and the Chihil Abdál of Islamic mythology does not
appear. For the Abdáls in Bengal see Risley, People of India,
pp. 76 and 119.
ABDAL, an Aráín clan (agricultural), found in Montgomery,
ABDÁLÍ, (1) a term once applied generally to all Afgháns (g. v.), but
now apparently obsolete: (2) the name of a famous family of the
Saddozai Patháns which gave Afghánistán its first Afghán dynasty :
Now known as Durrání, this family belonged to the Sarbaři branch
of the Afgbáns, and is believed by them to derive its name from Abdál
or Avdál bin Tarín bin Sbarkhabún b. Sarban b. Qais, who received
this name from Kwhája Abú Ahmad, an abdált or saint of the Chishtiá
* It is the plur, of badal, .substitute,' and the Abdál, 40 in number, take the fifth place
in the Súfí hierarchical order of saints issuing from the great Qutb. Also called "Rukába,
• guardians,' they reside in Syria, bring rain and victory and avert calamity: Ericyclopedia
of Islám, 8. v. p. 68.
+ See Abdál supra.



AháriAhir.
dhárf, a doubtfal synonym of Aheri (q. v.).
AHERÍ (A), Herí, Ahárí (?), an out-caste and often vagrant tribe, found in the
south-east Punjab, and originally immigrant from Rájpútána, especi-
ally Jodhpur and Bíkáner. The name is said to be derived from
her, a herd of cattle, but the Aheri, who appears to be usually
called Herí in the Punjab, is by heredity a hunter and fowler. He
is however ordinarily a labourer, especially a reaper, and even culti-
vates land in Hissár, while in Karnál he wakes saltpetre.* In ap-
pearance and physique Aherís resemble Baurias, but they have no
dialect of their own, and are noty as a body, addicted to crime.
Of their numerous gots the following are found in the Bawal.
nizámat of Nábha :-
Bhata.
Gahchand. :1 Panwal.
Chahurál.
Ghaman.
Rathor.
Cháran.
Gogal.
Ságaria.
Chandália.
Gotálá.
Sailingia.
Dekhta.
Hájípúria. .
Samelwal.
Dahinwál.
Jhindia.
Sandlas.
Dahmiwál.
Junbal.
Sársut.
Dharoria.
Mahta.
Sendhi,
Dhárúheria.
Mewal.
The Aherís are almost all Hindús, but in the Phulkíán States a few
are Sikbs. Besides the other village deities they worębip the goddess
Masání and specially affect Bábájí of Kohmand' in Jodhpur and
Rhetrpal. In marriage four gots are avoided, and widow re-marriage
is permitted. All their rites resemble those of the Dhánaks, t and
Chamarwá Brahmans officiate at their weddings and like occasions.
The Naiks, who form a superior class among the Herís, resemble
them in all respects, having the same gots and following the same
pursuits, but the two groups do not intermarry or even take water
from each other's haods. On' the other hand the Aberí is said to
be dubbed Thorí as a term of contempt, and possibly the two tribes
are really the same.
For accounts of the Aheris in the United Provinces, see Elliot's
Glossary.
Ahín. The name Ahír is doubtless derived from the Sanskrit abhira, a
milkman, but various other folk etymologies are current. I
The Ahírs' own tradition as to their origin is, that a Brahman once
took a Vaisya girl to wife and her offspring were pronounced amata
sangyá or outcast; that again a daughter of the amat-sangyás married
a Brahman, and that her offspring were called abhírs (i.e., Gopás or
herdsmen), a word corrupted into Ahir.
They are chiefly found in the south of Debli, Gurgaon, and Rohtak
and the Phulkíán States bordering upon these districts, and in this
• Aheris also work in reeds and grass, especially at making winnowing-baskets and
stools of reed.
+ The Aheris claim that they will not take water from a Dhának, as the Chuhras do.
Yet they rank no higher than the latter, since they eat dead animals, although they will
not remove filth.
One of these is ahi.dr, "snake-killer,' due to the fact that Sri Krishna had once killed
a snake. But according to the Mad-Bhagwat, Askand 10, Addhiyao 17, Sri Krishna did you
kill the snake, but brought it out of the Jumna,



Ahir groups.
limited tract they form a considerable proportion of the whole popula..
tion.
The first historical mention of the Abhíras occurs in the confused
statements of the Vishnu Purina concerning them and the Sakas,
Yavapas, Báhlikás and other outlandish dynasties which succeeded
the Andhras in the 3rd century A. D.
In the 4th century the Abhíras, Arjunáyanas and Málavas are de-
scribed as republican tribes settled in eastern Rájputána and Málwa.*
They are divided into three khánps or sub-castes :-
(1) the Nandbansí, who call themselves the offspring of Nandá, the
foster-father of Sri Krishna.t
(2) the Jádúbansi, who claim to be descendants of the Yádú, a
nomadic race.
(3) the Guálbansí, who say that they are descended from the Guálá
or "herdsman' dynasty and the Gopis, who danced with the
god Krishna in the woods of Bindraban and Gokal.
The Jádúbansi Ahírs are mostly found in the Ahírwatíſ and Hariána,
while the Nandbansis and Guálbansís are found in Mathura and
Bindraban.
All three sub-castes are endogamous and avoid four gots in marriage.
The gots of the Jádúbansís are:-
1. Abhiryá.. , 21. Jharudhya. 39. Lanbá.
2. Bachhwalya. 22. Kakrályá.
40. Lodigá.
3. Bálwán.
Kakudhya.
41. Mahlá.
Bhankarya. 24. Kalalya.
42. Mandhár.
Bhogwaryá.
Kalgan.
Mitha.
6. Bhunkalán. 26. Kánkas.
Mohal.
Bhúsaryá.
27. Karera.
Nagarya.
8. Bhusla.
28. Khalod.
Narbán.
9. Chatasya. 29. Kharotya.
Notiwal.
Chura:
30. Kbarpará.
48. Pacharya.
11. Dábar.
31. Khátodhyá from 49. Sánp.
12. Dahiya.
Khatode in Patiala. 50. Sonáryá.
13. Datarli.
32. Khiswá.
51. Sultányá.
14. Dholiwal. 33. Khola.
52. Thokarán.
15. Dhundalá. 34. Khorry6.
53. Tohániá.
16. Dumdolya. 35. Khosa.
54. Tundak.
17. Harbalá. 36. Khurmya.
55. Solangia, original.
18. Jádam.
37. Kinwal.
ly Solankí Rájpúts.
19. Jánjaryá. 33. Kosalya from Koslí
20. Jarwal.
in Rohtak.
*V, A. Smith, Ancient History of India, pp. 240 and 250.
+ Sri Krishna, through fear of Rájá Kans, was changed for Nand's daughter and so
brought up by him, Nand was an Ahir ; Krishna, a Kshatrya. Jádú was the son of Jagat
from whom Krishna was descended, and the Jádúbansí also claim descent from him.
I Another account says that the Ahirwatí is held by the Jádúbansí and Nandbansk
who smoke together, whereas the Guálbansí will not smoke with them in spite of the
latters' inferiority).
It is not easy to define the boundaries of Ahírwatí. It includes Rewárí and the country
to the west of it ; Ráth or Bighauta lying to the south-west of that town and apparentiv
overlapping it since Nárnaul appears to lie in the Ráth as well as in the Ahírwati.
os fins con
25.
10.



Ahir origins.
56. Bhanotra, originally Natháwat Rajputs, from Amla Bhanera
in Jaipur: their ancestor committed murder and fled, finding a refuge
with the Ahírs : and
57. Dáyar, originally Tunwar Rájputs till 995 Sambat: the legend
is that Anangpál had given his daughter in marriage to Kálú Rájá of
Dháránagar, but her husband gave her vessels for her separate use, and
she complained to her father. Anangpál would have attacked his
son-in-law but his nobles dissuaded him, and so he treacherously invited
Kálú to his second daughter's wedding. Kálú came with his four
brothers, Parmar, Níl, Bhawan and Jagpal, but they learnt of the plot
and fled to the Ahírs, from whom Kálú took a bride and thus founded
the Dáyar got.
Some of the Nandbansí gots are:
1. Bachhwal.
4. Khatbán.
2. Harbanwal.
5. Pacharya.
3. Kaholí.
6. Rábar.
7. Saņwaryá.
The Ahírs again give their name to the Ahírwatí dialect, which is
spoken in the tract round Nárnaul, Kanaudh and Rewárí. It differs
little, if at all, from the ordinary Hindi of the south-east Punjab ;* for
a full account of it and its local varieties the reader must be referred to
the Linguistic Survey of India, Vol. IX, pp. 49–51 and 233--241.
The Ahírs are all Hindus, but in spite of their traditional connec-
tion with Srí Krishna,t they affect Shivají, Deví and Thákarjí. They
also worship Bandeo, whose shrine is at Raipur in the Bawal nizámat
of Nábha and who is said to be a black snake: hence no Ahír will kill
a black snake. In Saharanpur their marriage deities are Braha and
Bar deotas, but no traces of these cults are noted in the Punjab. I
Ahír women dress differently to those of the Ját tribes, wearing
red and yellow striped gowns, with a shawl of red muslin. But in
Jind they are said to wear a gown (lenghá) of blue cloth.
· The Ahírs were probably by origin a pastoral caste, but in the
Punjab they are now almost exclusively agricultural, and stand in
quite the first rank as husbandmen, being as good as the Kamboh
and somewhat superior to the Ját. They are of the same social
standing as the Ját and Gújar, who will eat and smoke with them;
but they have not been, at any rate within recent times, the dominant
race in any considerable tract. Perhaps their nearest approach to
such a position was in the State of Rámpur near Rewárí, whose last
chief, Ráo Tula Rám, mutinied in 1857 and lost his state. His family
still holds a jágír and its members are addressed as Ráo, a title which
is indeed grateful to every Ahír.
They are industrious, patient, and orderly; and though they
are ill spoken of in the proverbs of the country side, yet that is prob-
ably only because the.Ját is jealous of them as being even better
cultivators than himself. Thus they say in Rohtak: “Koslí (the head
* C. R. 1891, p. 263,
+ Still, according to Mr. Maclagan, Krishna is their patron, O. R. 1891, p. 120. Moreover,
they adopt Brahman or Bairágí gurús, receiving from them a kanthi (necklace) and the
Krishna-mantra in return for a bhet or pújá of Rs. 2 or 3.
| N. I. N. Q. IV & 460.



Ahig-Ahláwat.
village of the Ahírs) has fifty brick houses and several thousand
swaggerers.” So in Delhi: “Rather be kicked by a Rájput or stamble
uphill, than hope anything from a jackal, spear grass, or an Ahír" ;
and again: "All castes are God's creatures, but three castes are
ruthless, when they get a chance they have no shame : the whore,
the Bánya, and the Ahír." The phrase Ahir be-pír refers to their sup-
posed faithlessness. But these stigmas are, now-a-days at least, wholly
undeserved.
Their birth, death and marriage ceremonies are like those of the
Málís, Gújars and Játs. Karewa is permissible, but in Jind, it is said,
a widow may not marry her husband's elder brother and this is also
the case in Gurgaon, where some of the higher Abír families disallow
widow re-marriage in toto* and hold aloof from other Abírs. Like
the Rájputs the X bírs recogoise concubinage, and a father has a right
to the guardianship of a concubine's son (suretwál), but he does not
inherit. The Ahírs who disallow widow re-marriage also follow the
rule of chúndavand.t
They eat kachchi and pakki with all Brahmans and Vaisyas, but the
latter do not eat kachchi from them. They will eat kachchi with Ráj-
puts, Játs, Hindu Gújars, Rors, Sunárs and Tarkháns, while the latter
eat also with the former. They do not eat flesh. I
In and around Delhi city the Abír is also known as Ghosi and
claims descent from Nandji, adopted father of Krishna (Kanhyáji).
Anciently called Gwálás the Ahírs were called Ghosi after their conver-
sion to Islámſ, but any cowman or milkseller is also called ghosi.
The principal Ahír or Ghosi gots are :
Mukhiall which ranks highest of all the gots.
Charia (graziers).
Ghur-chaşhá (cavalry men) and Kásab.
The Hindu Ghosi customs resemble those of the Hindu Rájputs. A
Gauș Brahman officiates at the phera rite in marriage. The Ghosi
have a system of panches and hereditary chaudhrís. If one of the
latter's line fail, his widow may adopt a son to succeed him, or, failing
such adoption, the panch elects a fit person.
A very full description of the Ahírs will be found in Elliott's Races of the North-West
Provinces, and also in Sherring, I, 332 ff.
AHLAWAT, a Ját tribe, said to be descended from a Chauhan Rájpút who
came from Sámbhar in Jaipur some 30 generations ago. From him
sprang the Ahlawat, Olián, Birma, Máre, and Jún Játs who do not
intermarry. The tribe is found in Rohtak, Delhi, and Karnál. Its
members worship a common ancestor called Sadu Deb.
* P. C. L. II., p. 132.
+ Ibid. p. 137.
Ibid. p. 138.
Ś The meaning appears to be that any Muhammadan who became a cowman by trade was
called Ghosi, and that this name then became applied to any Ahír or Gwála, so that we now
find the Hindu Ahír as well as his Muhammadan competitor commonly called Ghosi.
|| Mukhia, spokesman,' is also a title given to a leading member of the casto, but it does
not appear to be equivalent to chaudhri,



Ahli-Hadise-Ahmadzai.
from the
These the tube
port of conscious the perence parigintesand
AHL--Hadís, or “ People of the Tradition, formerly styled Wahabis
from the name of their founder. The Ahl-i-Hadís are Masalmán
purists. "They accept the six books of traditions as collected by the
Sunnís, but reject the subsequent glosses of the fathers and the voice
of the church, and claim liberty of conscience and the right of private
interpretation. They insist strongly upon the unity of God, which
doctrine they say has been endangered by the reverence paid by the
ordinary Musalmán to Muhammad, to the Imáns and to saints; and
forbid the offering of prayer to any prophet, priest or saint, even as a
mediator with the Almighty. They condemn the sepulchral honours
paid to holy men, and illumination of, visits to, and prostration before,
their shrines, and even go so far as to destroy the domes erected over
their remains. They call the rest of the Muhammadans “ Mushrik,"
or those who associate another with God, and strenuously proclaim that
Muhammad was a mere mortal man. They disallow the smoking of
tobacco as unlawful, and discountenance the ase of rosaries or beads.
Apparently they insist much upon the approaching appearance of the
last Imam Mahdi preparatory to the dissolution of the world. Politically
their most important and obnoxious opinion is that they are bound
to wage war against all infidels. The orthodox deny them the title of
Musalmáns.”
A full history of the "Ahl-i-Hadís” is beyond the scope of this
article. Its founder, Abdal-Wahháb, was born in Nejd in 1691 A. D.;
and his successors reduced the whole of Nejd and then overran the
Hijáz. In 1809 their piracies compelled the Government of Bombay
to capture their stronghold on the coast of Kirmán, and in 1811-18 the
Sultan of Turkey beheaded their chief and reduced them to political
insignificance. Their doctrines were introduced into India by Sayyid
Ahmad Shah of Rai Bareli, originally a free-booter who, after a visit
to Arabia, proceeded to the North-West Frontier, and there, in 1826,
proclaimed a jihád or religious war against the Sikhs. His extra-
ordinary ascendency over the tribes of the Pesháwar Border and his
four years' struggle, not wholly unsuccessful, with the Durranis on the
one hand and on the other with the Sikhs, and his ultimate. defeat and
death are described in James' Settlement Reports of Pesháwar (pp.
43-44) and more fully in Bellew's History of Yúsufzai (pp. 83_102).
Patna is the head-quarters of the sect in India, but it has also colonies
at Polosi on the Indus and at Sittána and Malka in Yusufzai beyond
Buner.
[For a general history of The Wahábis in India 'see thros articles in
Selections from the Calcutta Review, by E. J. O'Kinealy)...
AAL-I-HONÚD, (0) Indians : lit. 'people of the Indians' (Hunád, pl. of Hindi,
Catafago's Arabic Dicty. 8. v, Hunúd); (ii) Hindus, as opposed to
Muhammadans.
AHLUWÁLIA, one of the Sikh misls founded by Jassa Singh of Ahlá, a
village in Lahore, and now represented by the ruling family of
Kapurthalá.
A#MADÁNÍ, one of the unorganised Baloch tribes found in the lowlands of
Dera Ghazi Khán.
AHMADŽAI, one of the two main divisions of the Darwesh Khel Waziri



Ahmadzai-Akáli.
AHMADZAI, AMAZAI, one of the two principal clans of the Ushtarána Patháns.
A HÚJA (1) a Ját clan (agricultural), found in Multán. (2) Also a section of
the Dabra Aroſas.
AHÚLÁNA, one of the two great dharras or factions of the Játs found in
Rohtak, etc. See Dahiya.
AIBAK, a small sept found at Wahind Sarmána near Kahror in Multán
District which, despite its Turkish Dame, claims to belong to the
Joiya tribe.
AINOKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
AIPANTHÍ, a follower of the Aipanth, one of the Jogi orders. It is found
in Hissar and Mast Náth, founder of the Bohar monastery in the Rohtak
District, originally belonged to it.
Aiple; a sept or clan of Kanets found in the Kaljúņ parganá (Pațiálá
State territory), Simla Hills.
AJARí, ajjarí, aryálí, ayálí, ajárí fr. ajjar, herd, a goat-herd-in Ráwalpindi,
Jhelum, etc. In Jhelum, it is the name of a sept of turbulent Awáns
found in the village of Bhuchhal Kalán.
AJUDHIA-PANTHÍ, (i) a Hindu Vaishnava sect, so called because Rám Chandar
lived in Ajudhia (Oudb); (i) a Vaishnava. The latter is probably the
only correct meaning.
AKA KAEL, one of the eight principal clans of the Afrídís.
AkÁlí. The sect of the Akális differs essentially from all the other Sikh
orders in being a militant organization, corresponding to the Nágás
or Gosains among the Hindus. Their foundation is ascribed to Gurú
Govind* himself, and they steadfastly opposed Baoda's attempted
innovations. The term † is sometimes said to be derived from akáli.
purusha 'worshipper of the Eternal.' But akál means' deathless,' i.e.,
God,' and Akálí is simply God's worshipper.' The Akálís wear blue
chequered dresses, I and bangles or bracelets of steel round their wrists,
and quoits of steel in their lofty conical blue turbans, together with
miniature daggers, knives, and an iron chain.g
In their military capacity the Akálís were called Nihang, || or reckless,
and played a considerable part in the Sikh history, forming the Shabíds
* Govind Singh, the tenth and last Gurú of the Sikhs, 1675–1708.
7 Murray's Hist, of the Panjab, i., p. 130; Cunningham's Hist, of the Sikhs, p. 117.
I Malcolm points out that Krishna's elder brother, Bal Rám, wore blue clothes, whence he
is called Nilámbari, or clad in dark blue,' and Sitivas, or the blue clad' (Asiatick Re-
searches xi, p. 221).
& Strict Akálís do not wear the jatá or top.knot, but some do. Those who do not only
use dur and lota' water and also smoke, which the jatd wearers may not do. Others,
again, wear a yellow turban beneath the blue one, so as to show a yellow band across the
forehead. The story goes that a Khatrí of Delhi (Nand Lál, author of the Zindagináma)
desired to see the Gurú in yellow, and Govind Singh gratified his wish. Many Sikhs wear the
yellow turban at the Basant Panchmí. A pouplet erroneously ascribed to Bhai Gurdás says:
Sidh, sufed, jo pahne,
Surkh, zardáe, soi Gurbhái.
"They who wear dark blue (the Akálís), white (the Nirmalás), red (the Udásís), or yellow
are all brothers in the Gurú."
|| Ibbetson, § 522. Cunningham (p. 379) says nihango' naked' or 'cure' and it has that
meaning litera lly (cf. Platts 8. v.), but in Sikh parlance the word undoubtedly means
'free from care,' careless,' and so 'reckless,' In Hinduism it bears its original meaning.



10
Akáli-Akezai.
or first of the four dehſas. At the siege of Multan in 1818 a féw
Akálí fanatics* carried the faussebraye by surprise, and precipitated
the fall of that fortress. The career of Phúlá Singh illustrates
both their defects and their qualities. This great Akálí first came into
notice as the leader of the attack on Metcalfe's escort at Amritsar in
1809. He was then employed by Ranjit Singh, who stood in consider-
able awe of him, as a leader in the Indus valley, where he was guilty
of atrocious cruelty towards the Muhammadan population, and in
Kashmír. Finally, Phúlá Singh and his A kális contributed to, or
rather virtually won for Ranjit Singh, the great Sikh victory over the
Yúsafzais at Terí in 1823. In this battle Pbálá Singh met with a
heroic death, and his tomb at Naushahra is now an object of pilgrimage
to Hindus and Muhammadans alike.
Under Phúlá Singh's earlier leadership, and perhaps before his
rise, the Akálís had become a terror to friends and foes alike, and
they were dreaded by the Sikh chiefs, from whom they often luvied
contributions by force.t Ranjit Singh, after 1823, did much to re-
duce their power, and the order lost its importance.
The Akáli headquarters were the Akál Bunga I at Amritsar, where
they assumed the direction of religious ceremonies and the duty of
convoking the Gurumatá; indeed, they laid claim to exercise &
general leadership of the Khálsá. Sioce Ranjit Singh's time Anandpur
has been their real headquarters, but their influence has to a large.es-
tent passed away, and some of them have degenerated into mere
buffoons.
As an order the Akálís are celibate. They have, says Trumpp, no
regular chief or disciple, yet cne bears of their Gurus, whose leavings
arə eaten by their disciples (sewak or chela). They do not eat meat
or drink spirits, as other Sikhs do, but consume inordinate quantities
of bhang.
LITERATURE.-The general histories of the Sikhs, see art. 'Sikh'; J. C. Oman; Mystics,
Ascetics and Saints of India, London, 1903, pp. 153, 198—201; A. Barth, Religions of India
AXAZAI, () one of the principal branches of the UTMÁnzai Patháns, (ii) a
Black Mountain tribe, à section of the leazai clan of the Yúsufzai
Patháns, whose modern history is described in the Hazára Gazetteer,
1907, pp. 164–182.
AKERE, an agricultural clan, found in Shahpur.
Akezaí, a Pathán clan (agricultural), found in Montgomery.
* They were headed by one Jassa Singh, called Málá (* rosary') Singh, from his piety.
'He denied himself the use of bhang, the only intoxicating drug in use among tho Akslis.
See Carmichael Smyth's Reigning Fainily of Lahore, p. 188. Prinsep, on the Sikh Power in
the Punjab, p. 111, and Phoola Singh, the Akálí, in Carmichael Smyth, op. cit., pp. 185–182.
+ Contemporary writers had a low opinion of their character, e. g., Osborne describes
their insolence and violence (Court and Camp of Ranjit Singh, pp. 143--146, 181).
One of the takhts or thrones, of the Sikhs, M'Gregor, Hist. of the Sikhs, i. 288, says
that on visiting the temple (sic) of the akálís at Amritsar, the stranger presents a few
rupees and in return receives some sugar, while a small mirror is held before his face so
es to reflect his image. This practice, if it ever existed, is now obsoleto,



Akhund Khel Ali Sher Khel.
ARHUND KHEL, the section of the Painda Khel sept of the Malízai Yusufzai
Patháns to which the Khán of Dir belongs. It occupies the lower part
of the Kashkar (Dír) valley, in which lies the village of Dir. It owes
its vame to the fact that it was founded by Mulla Iliás or Akhúnd
Bábá who acquired a saintly repatation. [This Akhúud Bábá is
not to be confused with the Akhúnd of Swát, who was born in 1784
of Gújar parents in Buner or Upper Swát and as Abd-ul-Ghafúr
began life as a herd boy, but acquired the titles of Akhúnd and Buzury
(saint) by his sanctity. He married a woman of the Nikbí Khel.]
AKAÚNDZÁDA, OR PIRzáda, a descendant of a saint of merely local or
tribal reputation (as opposed to a Míán) among the Patháns of Swát
and Dir. The descendants of Mullá Mushki Alam rank as Akbúndzadás
because he held that rank, otherwise they would only be Sáhibzádas
(q. v.).
AKKUKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural), found in Montgomery. Cf. Akúk.
AKO Khel, sept of the Razzar clan of the Razzar Patbáns, found in
Peshawar.
A KORA, the branch of the Khattaks descended from Malik Akor, who found-
ed Akora on the Kábul river in the Pesháwar District in the time of
Akbar. The A kora or eastern faction of the Khattaks is opposed to
the western or Teri party.
Akrá, a tribe (agricultural) found in Jhelum [Gr., p. 126].
Akomai YÚSAFZAI, the tribe of Yúsafzai Patháns which now holds Upper
and Lower Swát. Their septs hold this territory as follows, working
upwards along the left bank of the Swát river : the Ránízai and Khán
Khel hold Lower Swát: while the Kuz-Sulízai (or lower Sulízai) compris-
ing the Ala Khel, Músá Khel and Babúzai ; and the Bar-Sulízai, com-
prising the Matorizai, Azzi and Jinkí Khels hold Upper Swát: Baizai
is a generic term for all these septs except the Ránízai. Working down-
wards on the right bank of the Swát are the Shamízai, Sebojní, Nikbi
Khel and Shamozai in Upper, and the Adinzai, Abazai and Khadakzai,
all, except the two last-named, known collectively as Khwázozai, in
Lower Swát. The Akozai also hold most of Dír, the Painda Khel
holding the left bank and the Sultán Khel the right below Chutiatanr,
while lower down the Sultán Khel holds both banks ; and below them
again lie the Nasrudín Khel and the Ausa Kbel.
AKÚKE, a great sept of the Joiyas found in Montgomery and Moltán, and
also in Baháwalpur State, in large numbers.
ALDANG, a sept of Kanets found in the village of Labrang in Kanáwar
in the Bashahr State).
A LIÁNÍ, one of the four clans of the Laghárí tribe of the Baloch, The chief
of the Laghárís belongs to it.
Alí Koánána, a clan of the Siáls : Chenab Colony Gazetteer, p. 54.
Ali Kael, an affiliated hamsáya or client clan of the Orakzai Pathans.
ALI Saee Kael, one of the four main clans of the Shinwarí Patháns, when
eastern sections are the Khuja or Khwája, Shekhmal, Asha, Pirwal
and Pisat. Other sections are the Aotar or Watar and the Pakhel.



12
Alizai–Ansárí.
ALIZAT, ALLEZAí, (1) one of the five great clans of the Orakzai Patháns. The
name is now practically obsolete and the clansmen are known by the
names of their septs, e.g., Stari, And and Tazi. The two last-named
are Shias, (2) a distinguished family in Multán (see Gazetteer 1902,
p. 163).
ALLAZAT, one of the principal branches of the Utmánzai Patháns. Of the
three Utmáuzai branches (Akazai, Allazai and Kanazai)the Allazai are
most numerous in Hazára and comprise three clans, Khushhál-kháni,
Saíd-kháni and TARKOELI. The leading families - are by clan Saíd-
khani, the most important being that of Khalábat, of wbich Mírzamán
Khán, Sir James Abbott's bravest, and most loyal follower, was a
member.
Alpar, a Mubammadan Ját clap (agricultural), found in Montgomery and
Multán.
ALLAHDADI, a Baloch clan (agricultural), found in Montgomery.
ALPIÁL, a tribe of Muhammadan Rajputs found in Rawalpindi where they
hold the southern corner of the Fatah Jang tahsil. Their marriage
ceremonies still bear traces of their Hindu origin, and they seem to
have wandered through the Khusháb and Talagang country before
settling in their present abodes. They are "a bold lawless set of men
of fine physique and much given to violent crime."
A LÚAJIA, a synonym for Kalál (q. v.).
Á LÚWÁLÁ, A LÚWÁLIA, A Lúwárí (see Ahlúwáliá).
ALWER, a Kharral clan (agricultural), found in Montgomery.
'Alwi, (1) a Ját clan (agricultural), found in Multán. (2)-or Alvi, a
branch of the Khokhars which claimed descent from the Khalifa Ali
and is found in Bahawalpur, Multán, Muzaffargarh and Ludhiána.
AMAZAI, a section of the Utmánzai Yúsufzai Patháng, lying north of the
Utmánzais. Their territory marches with the trans-Indus territory of
the Tanawali Khán of Amb.
AMLAWAT, a tribe of Játs claiming descent from Amla, a Rájput: found in
Jind.
AMRITSARIA, a Sikb, especially one who worships at the Golden Temple
in Amritsar.
ANANDÍ, à title found among Sanniásís.
ANDAR, & Pathán sept, which occupies most of the district south of Ghazni
in Afghánistán and is associated with the Músá Khel Kákar who are
descended from an Andar woman. Probably Ghilzais.
ANDÁR, a Ját clan (agricultural), found in Multán.
ANDWÁL, a sept of the Dhúnd tribe, found in Hazára.
ANGAR, Angra, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Ansáví (pl. of nisár, a helper),* lit. auxiliaries, was the title given to the
· believers of Madina who welcomed Muhammad after his flight from
* Ansári appears to be really an adjectival form from ansár, pl. of násir.
.



13
Ansári-Arain.
Mecca,* and those who claim descent from these men style themselves
Ansárí. One of the most interesting Ansári families in the Punjab is
that of the Ansári "Shaikhs of Jullundur. It claims descent from
Khalid ' Ansár' (Abú Ayúb), who received Muhammad in his house at
Madina, through Shaikhs Yusuf and Siraj-ud-dín (Shaikh Darwesh).
From the latter was descended the Pir Roshan, founder of the Roshanias.
These Ansárís are said by Raverty to be of Tájik extraction. They in-
termarry with the Barkis or Barikkis of Jullundur who are Patháns.
Ansárí, a Ját clan (agricultural), found in Multán.
ANÚJA, a Ját clan (agricultural), found in Multán.
Anwal, a Ját clan (agricultural), found in Multán.
AOR-MÁạ, a tribe of Afgháns : see Urmur,
APA-PANTHÍ, possibly a follower of Padmakar Bhát of Banda, a courtier of
the Mahratta chief, the Apa Sahib, and a worshipper of the Ganges.
The sect is mainly found in Rohtak and Aissár.
'ARAB, a Ját clan (agricultural), found in Multán. [It is very doubtful if the
Arabs of the Census returns are true Arabs, though there may be a few
Arab merchants, etc., found occasionally at'such centres as Peshawar
and Multán. It is possible that a certain number of Qureshis, Shaikhs
and others return themselves as Arabs.]
ÅRAIN, Rain (the latter form prevails in the Jumna valley), is a term wbich
has at least two distinct meanings : in the Sutlej valley and throughout
the eastern plains the Arains form a true caste, but in all the rest of
the two Provinces the term is applied to any market-gardener and is
synonymous with Bághbán, Málí, Maliár, and oven Ját in the South-
West Punjab. We are now concerned with the Arains as a caste.
Almost to a man Muhammadans and strongly inclined to orthodoxy,t
the Arains claim to be immigrants from Uch and have some affinities with
the Kambohs. On the other hand some of the Arain and Hindu Saini
clan names are identical, and those not always merely names of other
and dominant tribes. From Uch they migrated to Sirsa and thence into
the Punjab.
In Sirsa the Sutlej Árains meet those of the Ghaggar. The two do
not intermarry, but the Araios of the Ghaggar valley say they were
Rájputs living on the. Panjnad near Multán who were ejected some
four centuries ago by Saiyad Jalál-ul-dín of Uch. They claim some
sort of connection with Jaisalmer. Till the great famines of 1759
and 1783 A. D. they are said to have held all the lower valleys of the
Choya and Ghaggár, but after the latter date the Bhattis harassed the
Sumrás, the country became disturbed, and many of the Arains emi.
grated across the Ganges and settled near Bareli and Rámpur. They
marry only with the Ghaggar and Bareli Arains. The Sutlej Arains
See Muir's Life of Muhammad, p. 188-89 (abridged edition). The muhájarin were the
refugees who accompanied Muhammad, but the two names are sometimes confused. For
further details see Temple's Legends of the Punjab, III. The Saints of Jalandhar and
D. G. Barķloy, in P. N. Q., II.
† 8o much so that in Ambála the Shaikhs, though really often identical with the Rains.
arrogate to themselves a much higher place in the social scale.



Arain groups.
in Sirsa say that they are, like the Arains of Labore and Montgomery,
connected by origin with the Hindu Kambohs. Mr. Wilson thinks it
probable that both classes are really Kambobs who have become
Musalmáns, and that the Ghaggar Araios emigrated in a body from
Multán, while the others moved gradually up the Sutlej into their
present place. He describes the Arains of the Ghaggar as the most
advanced and civilised tribe in the Sirsa district, even surpassing the
Sikh Játs from Patiala ; and be considers them at least equal in social
status with the Játs, over whom they themselves claim superiority.
The Arains of Ferozepore, Ludhiána, Ambála and Hissár also trace
their origin from Uch* or its neighbourhood, though the Hissár Arains
are said to be merely Muhammadan Málís.
On the whole it would appear probable that the Arains originally
came from the lower Indus and spread up the five rivers of the Punjab;
and that at an early stage in their history a section of them moved
up the Ghaggar, perhaps then a permanent river flowing into the
Indus, and there gained for themselves a position of some importance.
As the Ghaggar dried up and the neighbouring country became more
arid, they moved on into the Jumna districts and cis-Sutlej tract
generally, and perbaps spread along the foot of the hills across the
line of movement of their brethren who where moving up the valleys
of the larger rivers. Their alleged connection with the Målís is probably
based only upon common occupation; but there does seem some reason
to think that they may perhaps be akin to the Kambohs, though the
difference must be more than one of religion only, as many of the
Kambohs are Musalmán.
In Ambála the Rains are divided into two territorial groups, Multání
and Sirsa wala. The former regard themselves as Shaikhs and will not
intermarry with the latter.
The sections of the Rains in Jullundur, in which District they form
more than 19 per cent of the population, and in Kapúrthalá are :
Adán, Shahpur.
Brahmin.
Arki, Sialkot
Burji.
Baggá, Gujrat.
Chachar.
Baghbán, Baháwalpur
Chábe, Sialkot.
Barár.
Chandor, Sialkot and Máler Kotla.
Bet or Bhat.
Chaniál, Sialkot.
Bhaddú, claiming to be Sindu Chandpál, Máler Kotla.
Rájputs from the Deccan. Chhanni.
Bhohar.
Chaughatta, Sháhpar and Bahá.
Bhambhani, Dara Ghazi Khán.
walpur.
Bhatti, Dora Ghazi Khán and | Dabri.
Baháwalpur.
Dhanjún, Baháwalpur.
Bhutta, Bahawalpar.
Dhenga, Máler Kotla.
Bot.t
Dhingá, Sialkot.
* Possibly the persistence of the Uch tradition points rather to religious influence than to
the place of origin.
+ The Bot or Bát claim descent from Malúk (tutor of Jahángir !), who received a grant
of land when Nurmahal was founded.
The Dhingá claim to be descendants of Fattu, son of Mitha, a Dháriwel Ját of Dhola
Kángar, Fattu was converted to Islám in Akbar's reign.



Arain origins.
Dhot, Baháwalpur.
Metla, in Dera Ghází Kbán.
Dole.
Mirok, Baháwalpur.
Gailana, claiming Bindu-Rájput Nadbi, Baháwalpur.
origin.
Nain, Máler Kotla.
Gaſhi, Gadhí
Nani (Gujrát).
Gándar.
Padú.
Ghabar, Baháwalpur.
Parjí.
Gher, Sialkot.
Pathán, also a Kamboh section,
Ghilú, Sialkot.
Baháwalpur.
Gilan, Máler Kotla.
Quraishi.
Gilin, Darbáh.
Rahlá.
Hadwani, in Dora Gháuí Khán. Rai or Rámí.
Hásí.
Ranbí,
Indráí.
Sonkal, in Dera Ghazi Khán.
Janála.
Sahja, Baháwalpur.
Ja(n)júa,* Gujrat.
Saki.
Jhanjhúna, in Shahpur.
Salota.
Jindran, Babáwalpur.
Sapál, in Sialkot.
Jiya, Bahawalpurit
Sindhi, Baháwalpur.
Jutála, Sialkot.
Sindhú.
Kamboh, Bahawalpur.
Sohad.
Khatura, (Katuri in Babáwalpur). Soháná.
Khohara, Gujrát.
Tárar, in Gujrát.
Khokhar, Gujrát, Sháhpur and
Thinda, Bahawalpur.
Bahawalpur.
Tind.
Kír, Sialkot.
Thanow, in Sialkot.
Mahmania, Sialkot.
Thekri, Babáwalpur.
Maqsúdpuria.
Wáband in Gujrát and Ráwalpindi.
Mandú.
In Gujrat the Wáhand, Khokbar, Baggá and Nain do not intermarry
with the Kamboh and Khobara sections--whom they regard as
inferior.
The nucleus of this caste was probably a body of Hindu Sainí or
Kamboh cultivators who were converted to Islám at an early period.
Thus in Jullundur the Arains say they came from Sirsa, Rania and
Dehli and claim descent from Rai Jaj (grandson of Lau, founder of
Lahore), who ruled Sirsa : that they were converted in the 12th
century and migrated to the Jullundur Doáb about 300 years ago.
But the Bhuttas claim descent from Rájá Bhúta, fifth in descent from
Rajá Karn and say they were forcibly converted even earlier-by
Mahmúd of Ghazni- and driven from Uch:-
Uchh na díte Bhútián chatá Basantí nár,
Dána, póni, chukgyá, chaban moti hár.
* The Bhútas neither surrendered Uch, nor the lady Basantí,
Food and water failed, and they had to eat pearls.'
* Janjúa claims to be descended from a Hindu Rájput of Pindi Bhattián. Mihr Mardane.
one of its ancestors, is said to have laid out the Shálimár Garden Dear Lahore.
† Said to be really Kambohs, not Arains.



16
Arain-Arorá.
The Araios, apart from their orthodoxy, differ little in their customs
and dress from the Muhammadans generally. In Multán they prefer the
blue majhlá or waistcloth to the white and those of one village (Jalla in
Lodhrán tahsíl) are in consequence known as the nílé paltan or 'blue
regiment.'.
ARAR, A RĶ, a tribe of Mubammadans of Ját status found in Dipálpur tahsil,
Montgomery District, where they are settled along the Lahore border on
the upper course of the Khánwah canal. They claim Mughal descent,
yet say they came from Arabia, and are fairly good cultivators. Their
ancestor came from Delhi, where he was in service 500 years ago, and
settled in their present seat. By contracting marriages with Játs they
have sunk to Ját status. In the Minchinabád nizámat of Bahawalpur
they are to be found intermarrying with, or giving daughters to, the
Wattús. Also found in Shábpur, and classed as agricultural in both
districts.
ARBI, a Muhammadan clan, said co be of Arabian origin, which was, in
Mughal times, given several villages round Multán, but it has now to a
large extent lost its hold of them. It is classed as Ját (agricultural)
'both in Multán and Montgomery and is also found in the Abmadpur
East tahsil of Baháwalpur.
ARK, a tribe of Muhammadan Játs, found in Jind, whose members are
'said to still revere their jathera Sain Dás' shrine, and to give their
dhiánis Re. 1 at weddings in his name.
ARKE, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural), found in Amritsar.
ARORÁ, or Roșá as it is often pronounced, is the leading caste par
excellence of the Jatki-speaking, or south-western part of the Punjab,
i.e., of the lower reaches of the five rivers and, below their junction, of
the Panjnad, extending through Babáwalpur into Sind. Higher up
the courses of the five rivers the Arorá shares that position with the
Khattrí. The caste is wider spread and far more numerous than the
Bhátia, but fully half the Arorás of the Punjab dwell in the Multán
division and the Deraját; though the caste is found, like the Khattrí,
throughout Afgbánístán and even Turkestán. Like the Khattrí again,
but unlike the Bániá, the Arorá is no mere trader, but will turn his
hand to anything. He is an admirable cultivator, and a large
proportion of the Aroſás on the lower Chenab are purely agricultural,
while in the Western Punjab he will sew clothes, weave matting and
baskets, make vessels of brass and copper, and do goldsmith's work.
Despite his inferior physique, he is active and enterprising, industrious
and thrifty. “When an Aroſa girds up his loins (says a' Jhang
proverb), ho makes it only two miles to Lahore."*
In Baháwalpur the Aroſás arė very numerous and have the whole
of its trade in their hands, dealing in every commodity, and even
selling shoes and vegetables. Some are contractors, bankers or money.
lenders, and in the latter capacity they have now acquired a considerable
amount of land by mortgage or purchase from Muhammadan owners,
* A variant of this proverb current in Gujranwala is Lak badha Aroſian, te munna
koh Lahor--*if the Arofas gird up their loins, they make it only three-fourths of a kos to
Labore.



Arora groups.
17
though 40 or 50 years ago they did not own an acre of cultivated land.
In the service of the State more Aroſás than Mubammadans are
employed, though the latter are nearly six times as nomerous as the
former. As several land owning families have been ruined in their
dealings with Arosás such sayings* as Kirár howí yár, dushman dhár
na dhár, “he who has a Kirár for a friend, needs not an enemy," are
current in the State.“
By religion the great majority of the Aroſás are Hindus, but a good
many are Sikhs.
As a body the Arorás claim to be Khattrís and say that like them
they were dispersed by Paras Rám. Folk etymology indeed avers that
when so persecuted they denied their caste and described it as aur
or other,' whence 'Arorá '; but another tradition, current in Gujrát,
saye they were driven by Paras Rám towards Multán near which they
founded Arorkot. Cursed by a faqír the town became desolate and
the Arosás fled by its three gates, on the North, South and West,
whence the three main groups into which they are now divided. But
certain sections claim a different origin. The ruins of Aropkot are
said to be near Rohrí in Sindh. I
The Arośá caste is organised in a very similar way to the Khattrís.
Its primary divisions are the genealogical sections, as in all Hindu
castes, but it has three or four territorial groups :-
1. Uttaradhí, Northern.
2. Dakhaná or Dakhanadhain, Southern. Sometimes classed as
3. Dahrá, Western.
S one group.
4. Sindhí, of Sindh.
Numbers 2 and 3 intermarry in some parts, but not in others. In
Jhang they do not, but in Fázilká they are said to have begun to
do so. The probability is that the Dakhaná still take wives from the
Dabrá group, as they used to do.
The Uttarádhí sub-caste appears to be absolutely endogamous east
of the Indus, except in Bahawalpur where it takes wives from the
other three groups : in Hazára where it occasionally takes them from
* Kirár, a term applied by Muhammadans to any Hindu shop-keeper or trader, is by no
means equivalent to Aroſá, see 8. v. Kirár.
† The justice of the above quotation from the draft Gasetteer of the Baháwalpur State
is disputed, and it is pointed out that the earlier Daudpotra rulers of Baháwalpur employed
Aroſas in positions of trust, and even appointed them to semi.military office ás Bakhshis or
paymasters. At present the Arofas are losing ground, especially in the higher grades of the
State service.
I A correspondent, referring to the Aroſbans Aoli, an Urdu pamphlet published by the
Khatri Samachar Pres3, Lahore, odds some interesting details. · The pamphlet appears to be
based in a History of the Aroșbans in Nágri and the Bhu Sutr (Origin of the Worldi Purón
In the latter is given a dialogue between Parasu Ráma and Art, a Khatri, in which the latter
stoutly refuses to oppose the Brahmans and wins Parasu Ráma's respect, being advised by him
to settle in Sindh. The pamphlet also ascribes a sectarian origin to the Aroſa groups, and
declares that in 195 Vikrami social dissensions arose at Aropkot among the Aroras, so their
prirohit Gozain 8idh Bhoj convened a meeting at which the upholders of the old customs sat
to the north, - the reformers to the south and the moderates or neutrals to the west
Accordingly the North of Aroskot was assigned to the corservatives and the South to
both the other parties, a fact which explains why the Dakhan's and Dahras are sometimes
regarded as one and the same.
| Punjab Census Report, 1883, $ 644.



Arora traditions.
the Dahrás or Dakhanás on payment but not by exchange; and in
Ferozepore where it takes frori the Dahrás.*
The Uttaradhi alone seem, as a rule, to have the Bárí-Budjábí
divisions. The Bári group consists of 12 sections, thus-
Sub-group (e).
1. Ghumai.
4. Bazáz.
2. Narule.
5. Shikri.
3. Monge.
Sub-group (ii).
6. Manchande.
7. Pasríche.
Sub-group (iii).
8. Kantor.
11. Wadhwe.
9. Mának Tahle.
12: Sethi.
10. Gurúwáre.
And of these numbers 1-7 intermarry, but will only take wives from
numbers 8-12, and there is a further tendenoy on the part of numbers
1-5 to discontinuo giving daughters to numbers 6 and 7. In the
south-east of the Punjab the Bárí and Bunjáhí groups exist both
among the Northern and Southern Aroſás.t
A list of the Aroșá gots or sections will be found in Appendix I to this
Volume.
There are a few sections, e.g., Sachden, Lund, Bazáz and others,
which are found in more than one of the territorial groups. The Sethi
section may possibly be the same as the Seth or Sethi Section of the
Khattris. The Rassewat or ropemakers are clearly by origin an occupa.
tional section like the Bazáz or clothiers.
The names ending in já are beyond all question patronymics. Others
such as Budhrájá or Bodhrájí suggest a religious origin.
The Gosain Mule-santie claim to be descendants of a Gaur Brahman
who came to the Jhang District and assumed the name of the Gurúwárá
section, but became a devotee or gosain who made converts.
Other sections have various traditions as to their origins : Thus the
Nárangs say they were originally Raghbansís who deniəd their race
when Paras Rám destroyed the Khattrís, with the words ná rag, 'No
Raghbansi.' Nárag became Narang. The Chíkur, a sub-section of the
Sachdeos are so called because on a marriage in that section sweet-
meats were as plentiful as mud (chíkur). Narúlá is derived from nirálá,
'unique,' because once a snake got into the churn when a woman was
making butter, so the men of this section never churn, though its
women may.
The Gogias or Gogas have a saying:
Khat khúh, bhar páni, Tán tani parsing Gogiúní.'
i.e., they say to a would-be son-in-law:
Dig a well and fill it with water, Then marry a Gogiání.
jú are beyond a religious origin. caur Brahman
ons have variouinally Raghbansís
a words ná rag, No
o can became Nao Khattris, ansis who ging; Th
* Trans-Indus Captain O'Brien notes a solitary case of a girl of the Jam section (Uttará.
dhí) being given to a Kumbhar (Dakhaná).
† Sirsa Settlement Report, 1884, p. 114.



Arora totem sections.
19
As in other castes some sections of the Aroras are credited wità:
inherited curative powers. Thus the Dalewánís of Jámpur can cure
hydrophobia by spitting on a little earth and applying it to the bite.
This power was conferred on their forbears by the blessing of their
pir, the saint of Daira Din Panáh. The Duas* have an inherited power
of curing a sprain in the back or loins by touching the part affected.
The pain called chuk may also be cured by this section wbich uses the
following charm :-Duá sith barí, phúlón bhaſi dari, bhanne chil
(waist) karéndá sári.' The charm is read over a cloth and this is then
applied thrice to the part, a push being finally given to it to expel
the pain. The power was conferred on Seth Barí, the ancestor of
the section, by faqirs. It is also said to be essential that the patient
should go straight home without looking back. The power is exercised
gratis.
A man of the Chugh got can cure chuk or pain in the loinst by
pushing the sufferer from behind. If a Chugh is not on hand, it is
sufficient to go to his house and rub one's back against the wall.
Chugh may be derived from chuk, because the tribe has this power,
but perhaps the idea is simply that a Chugh has power over chuic. It
can also be cured by a family of Dhingrá Arorás of Rájanpur who
apply a part of their clothing to the part affected and push the
patient thrice, or if none of them are present their house-wall is as
efficacious as a Chugh.
Several Arorá sections are named after animals such as :-
Babbar (? 1) in Montgomery. I Lúmar, fox, Montgomery.
Chutáni, I bat.
Machhar, mosquito, Gujrát.
Gábá, calf.
Makkar, locust, Gujrát.
Gbírá, dove, Montgomery and Mendá (?) ram or Mindhá, long-
Multán.
haired, Montgomery.
Giddar, jackal.
Nangiál, snake, Dera Ismail
GhoỊá, horse, Dera Ismaí1 Khán. Kbán.
Hans, goose, Montgomery.
Nág-pál, Nang-pál. ||
Kúkar, $ Kukkar, cock, Mont Nangſú.
gomery, Multán and Hissár. (?) Siprá, a serpent.
Kukſoja, cockerell, Dera Ismail
Khán.
Other sections are named from plants, etc., and are perhaps more
likely to be totemistic. Such are:-
Obáwala, rice.
Jandwání, pamed after the jand
Gerá, said to avoid the use of | tree in Dera Ismail Khán.
ochre, gerú, (in Dera Ismail Kastúria, said to avoid the use of
Bhán).
mask, kastúrá, (Dera Ismail
Gheia, fr. ghi, clarified butter. Khẩn).
* In Hisear this section of the Aroſás may not wear blue lénghá (trousers).
+ A child born feet foremost can cure pain in the loins by kicking the part affected.
Ohutani, bat: a child was once attacked by bats, which, however, left him uniņired.
The section worships bats' nests (charuchitti) at marriages.
& The Kúkar will not eat fowls, but most Hindus have a prejudice against them as food
and in this very caste the Mehndiratta have for the last 12 or 14 years refused to eat them
too.
|| Nangpál does not appear to mean 'snake,' but protector or raiser of snakes.



Arora customs.
Kațbpál, wood or timber (Montol Mungi, a kind of tree (Hissár).
• gomery).
Pabrejá, a kind of plant (Multán)
Katária,* dagger (Multán).
Ribání, ſ basil.
Khani-jau, barley-Bater.
Sáwi-bútí, green-herb.
Lotá, a vessel.t
Selání(?), pipal tree, Dera Ismail
Mának-tahliá: said, in Hissár, to Khán.
reverence the táhli or shisham Taneja,ll a kind of grass, tiran
tree.
(Multán and Montgomery).
Mehndirattá, henna : (Mont-
gomery and Multán).
Tareja, tarri, "a gourd': their ancestor once had to conceal himself
among gourds, and they do not eat gourds.
Veh-khani, Víá-khání poison-eater: fr. veh or viú, poison', in the
Sindhi dialect as spoken in Bahawalpur. Possibly arsenic is meant.
With regard to the sections mentioned as existing in Dera Ismail
Khán, it is distinctly said that each shows reverence to the animal
or plant after which it is named, thinking it sacred. The animal is
fed, and the plant not cut or injured. The Cháwalás, however, do not
abstain from using rice, or show it any respect.
The women of the Uttaradhí group wear red ivory bracelets (and
affect red petticoats with a red border, in Ferozopore), whence this
group is styled Lálchuriwálá.
The Dakhauá women wear white ivory bracelets (and also affect
red petticoats, the lower part 'laced with blackI).
By gotra the Arorás, in Gujrát at least, are said to be Kusbal, but
their real gotra appears to be Kásib, ? Kishab or Keshav.
At weddings the Ut:arádbis in Ferozepore are said to have a distinc-
tive custom in the do rate phore, i.e., the boy's party must reach the
bride's house on the afternoon of the 5th if the date fixed be the 6th
or night of the 7th and the milni must be on the 5th-6th.' Dakhnás
and Dabrás must on the other hand arrive before or on the afternoon
of the 6th and if the logan be fixed for an early hour on the 6th the
bridegroom and a Brahman go in advance for that ceremony, the .
wedding-party following so as to arrive in the afternoon.
Widow marriage** is in theory roprobated, but in practice tolerated
among the Aroſás, and in the south-west of the Punjab it is often
* This section has a legend that a dagger fell from a wall amongst a number of children
who were playing beneath it, but did not hurt them. Hence the section became known as
Katáriá, and worships the dagger, putting flowers before it at marriages.
† Declare they milked a cow into a lotá and presented it to their gurú.
The Mehndírattá in Multán abstain from the use of henna, but so do other Hindus.
$ Because one of its members once received a faqir cordially, and the faqir blessed bim
saying he should prosper like basil (ríhání).
In Multán the Tanejás abstain from eating tarli (gourd): or at least tbeir women do, in
Montgomery. The Tanejás of Jhang say they are Khattrís and that their ancestor instead
.of employing his own purohit called in some other Brahman and seated him on a kind of
grass called tiran, whence came the name Taneja.
Dahrá women are said to have red petticoats with a green border. These refined distinc-
tions may possibly be observed in Ferozepore, but they are not general. It is also said
hat in some places Dabrá women alone wear' white, and Dakhanás spotted bracelets of both
colours.
** In Muzaffargarh widow re-marriage is not approved, and a couple who marry in
defiance of the prejudice against it are called kachchrá, i, e., mulish or wicked.



Arora-Arya Samaj.
solemnized by the couple going out and circumambulating burning
reeds. The Brabmans recognise widow marriage and assist at it, in
fact if it is solemnised without a Brahman, people refrain from eating
or drinking with the couple for a short time.
The customary law of the Arosás differs, both from Hindu Law and
the ordinary Punjab Custom,' In its main features it resembles that
of the Hindus generally in the south-west Punjab, and one of its
distinctive features is the sawái, an extra quarter share which goes to
the eldest son. Many Arorá sections allow sons by the wife of
another caste provided sbe was married as a virgin, not as a widow,
one-third of their father's property, two-thirds going to the sons by
the other (Aroșá) wife. The position of daughters and sisters is more
favourable than it usually is among Hindus under the Punjab Custom.*
ARWAL, a Ját tribe, found in tbe Sangarh tahsíl of Dera Gházi Khan Dis-
trict. Like the Mapjotbas and Sánghis it follows the Baloch customs
in all matters connected with marriage, etc., thus differing from nearly
all the other Ját tribes of that tahsil. Also found in Multán, where it
is classed as agricultural.
ARYA, a Ját clar (agricultural) found in Multán.
ARYA Samáj.-By far the most important modern Hindu sect in the Punjab,
the Arya Samaj was founded about 1847 by Pandit Dayávand Saras-
wati, a Brahman of Kathiáwár. Born in 1824, Dayanand bad an
equal aversion to idolatry and marriage, and after profound researches
in Sanskritic lore ha founded a samáj or union at Lahore soon after
1847-and subsequently in the rest of the Punjab. The latter
part of his life was spent in travels in the United Provinces aód
Rájputána. His attacks on existing Hinduism roused great antagonism.
He insisted on a special interpretation of the Vedas and left behind him
several works such as the Vede Bhashya, or translation of the Vedas,
the Satyarth Prakúsh in which the Arya religion is contrasted with
others, and the Bhumka, an introduction to the study of the Vedas.
"The Arya or. Vedic religion", writes Mr. Maclagan," is primarily
the outcome of the solvent action of natural science on modern
Hinduism. The members of the Arya Samáj find the fantastical
representations of the world and of man which are put forward in the
eighteen Puranas to be inconsistent with natural science, and so reject
their authority, looking on them as the outcome of the ignorance and
craft of comparatively recent generations of Brahmaps. The original
and only authoritative scriptures in the eyes of the Arya Samaj are
the four Vedas, and its professed aim is to restore tbe paramount
authority of the Vedas by purging away subsequent accretions. Scrip-
tures more recent than the Vedas and anterior to the Puranas (such
as the Brahmanns, the six philosophic Darshanas, the ten Upanishads,
etc.), are regarded as explanatory of the Vedas and autboritative only
where they are not contradictory thereto. The Vedas themselves con-
stitute the only infallible revelation.-'The Vedas', wrote Dayanand,
are revealed by God. I regard them as self-evident truth, admitting
of no doubt and depending on the authority of no other book, being
ecial internet Bháshyareligion is of the ve
*Punjab Oustomary Law, XVIII, pp. vii, ix, xvii, cf. also Introdi, p. 8.



22
Arya Samaj doctrines.
represented in nature, the kingdom of God. The bases of the Aryan
faith are the revelation of God in the Vedas and in Nature, and the first
practical element in this belief is the iu torpretation of the Vedas in
conformity with the proved results of natural science.
In the interpretation of the Vedas the Arya Samaj finds itself at
issue with the Sanskritists of Europe, whose translations represent
the Vedas as the religious literature of a primitive people and, like the
literature of other primitive peoples, quite regardless of, and inconsist.
ent with, scientific accuracy. The Aryas contend that such a view
arises from a mistaken literal translation of their scriptures, and that
the earlier, and consequently more trustworthy, commentators having
always refused to construe the Vedas iu their literal sense, it is a
mistaken view to suppose that they were originally composed with
any meaning other than a metaphorical or derived ove.. Following
these principles, the Samáj not only defends the Vedic rishis from all
inputations of pantheism and polytheism, bat finds in their writings
numerous indications of an accurate acquaintance with the facts of
science. It holds that cremation, vegetarianism, and abstinence from
spirituous liquors are inculcated by the Vedas, and inculcated to a
large extent on purely scientific grounds. It holds that the great
religious rite of Vedic times, the agnihotra or homa sacrifice, is instituted
with a view to rendering air and water wholesome and subservient to
health, and because it plays a prominent part in putting a stop to
the prevalence of epidemics and the scarcity of rainfall.' It is con-
vinced that the latest discoveries of science, such as those of electricity
and evolution, were perfectly well known to the seers who were in-
spired to write the Vedas.
While conceding this much to modern natural science, the Argas
refuse to see in it anything tending to materialism or atheism. Retain-
ing their confidence in the Vedas, they have avoided the radical
materialism of some of the earlier opponents of popular Hinduism.
The Arya philosopby is orthodox, and based mainly on the Upanishads.
The tenets of Dayánand, though leading rather to the Shankya doc-
trine, do not fit in precisely with any one of the six orthodox systems;
but these systems are all regarded by the Aryas as true and as differ-
ent aspects of the same principles. The three entities of Dayánand's
philosophy are God, the Soul and prakriti or Matter. Soul he regarded
as physically distinct from God, but related to Him as the contained
to the container, the contemplated to the contemplator, the son to the
father. Soul enters into all animals and there are indications of soul
in the vegetable kingdom also. In most of its details the Aryan system
retains the terminology of the traditional pbilosophy of Hinduism.
It maintains above all things the law of metempsychosis and places
the aim of virtue in escape from the law; but this moksh or beatitude
is for an era (kalp) oply, after the termination of which the soul
resumes its wanderings. The localization of the Hindu paradises,
Parlok and Swárg, is rejected : heaven and bell lie in the pleasures and
sorrows of the soul, whether these be in this life or in the life to come.
As a consequence of this doctrine it holds the futility of rites on
behalf of the dead, and by this cuts at the root of that great Hindu
institution, the srúddh. Like other Hindus the Aryas burn the dead,



Arya Samaj aims.
23
but for alleged sanitary reasons they employ spices for the buroing.
At first they took the phúl to the Ganges, but now they cast it into
the nearest stream : they do not call in the Acháraj, and they omit all
the ceremonies of the kiryakarm. At marriage they go round the
sacred fire and walk the seven steps like the Hindus, but omit the
worship of Ganesh. They generally employ Brahmans at weddings,
but in several koowo instances these have been dispensed with. The
Samáj finds an efficacy in prayer (rrárthana) and worship (upásná);
but it greatly limits the number of ceremonies to which it accedes any
meritorious powers. It discourages entirely the practice of bathing in
sacred streams, pilgrimages, the use of beads, and sandal-wood marks,
gifts to worthless mendicants, and all the thousand rites of popular
Hinduism. Orily those rites (sanskuras) are to be observed which
find authority in the Vedas, and these are 16 in number only. Ido.
latry and all its attendant ceremonies have, according to the Argas, no
basis in the Vedas and vo place in true religion. Rám, Krishna and
other objects of popular adoration are treated euhemeristically as pious
or powerful princes of the olden time; and in their salutation to each
other the Aryas substitute the word "Namaste' for the 'Rám Rám'
of the vulgar.
Social and political aims of the Samáj. - The Aryas are careful to
defend their religion from a charge of novelty : they regard it as a revival
of an old and forgotten faith, the decay of which was due mainly to the
Brahmans. The Arya theory of to-day is that the real Brahman is one
who is a Brahman in the heart; that the Vedas are not confined to one
class; and that all castes are equal before God. It is careful, however, to
accept the existence of the four castes of ancient Hinduisin: it retains the
sacred thread for the three superior caştes, and by implication debars
the Sudras from some of the privileges of the twice-born, In practice
no Arya will marry with another caste or eat with men of another caste.
The sect being almost entirely composed of educated men and being
based on theories unfitted to the understanding of the lower castes, the
right of Chúhras and the like to join its ranks has not, I understand,
been put to the test. But the Samáj is said to have been successful in
receiving back into Hinduism persons converted to Christianity or
Muhammadanism and in reinstating such persons in caste. The Aryas
do not regard the cow as a sacred animal, but follow Hindu prejudice
in considering the slaughter of a cow more haipous than that of other
animals : and in the anti-cow-killing movement the Samáj was to some
extent identified with the movement, though lese so in the Punjab than
in the United Provinces. In other respects the social programme of the
Samáj is liberal and anti-popular in the extreme. It sets its face
against child-marriage and it encourages the remarriage of widows. It
busies itself with female education, with orphanages and schools, dis-
pensaries and publio libraries, and philanthropic institutions of all sorts.
The Arya doctrines have been formulated in a series of ten somewhat
wide propositions, and any person professing belief in the funda-
mental principles of the Samáj is eligible for membership, and may,
after probation, be admitted as a full member and obtain a vote in the
affairs of the society. Weekly meetings are held-generally on Sun.
days, so as to admit of the presence of Government servants and



24
Arya Samáj-Aujla.
entral contas been very for any
pleaders with prayers, lectures on the Vedas and other subjects,
hymns sung on the Sáma Veda system, and other miscellaneous pro-
ceedings. At an annual meeting, a report is read and an Executive
Committee with office-bearers appointed. Each local Samaj is inde-
pendent of the others : but a considerable rumbor of the local Samájos
have voluntarily submitted to the Paropakáriní Sabha or Provincial
Committee, which in a general way supervises the local centres and
arranges for the due provision of Upadeshaks or missionaries. The Arya
Samáj, though paying extreme reverence to the memory of Swami
Dayanand, refuses to look on him or any one else as an infallible
Guru; and in the absence of any central control exercised by an
individual, the organization above described has been very instru-
mental in keeping the society together and preventing so far any
serious schism in its ranks. A still more marked influence is un-
doubtedly exercised by the Dayánand Anglo-Vedic College, which
was founded in Lahore some time ago and has been conducted entirely
on Aryan lines. The College, while preparing students in the ordinary
subjects with considerable success for the university examinations, pays
special attention to instruction in Sanskrit and Hindi, and imparts &
certain amount of religious training by the institutions of morning and
evening prayer in the boarding houses, aud by the reading of extrants
from the Satyarth Prakásh."
The above quotations show how inadequately the Arya Samaj is
described as a sect. Since they were penned, in 1891, the Samáj bas
been divided on the question of the lawfulness or otherwise of
animal foods and two parties have been formed, one the vegetarian
or Mahátma, the other the flesh-eating or cultured. The former is,
however, by no means narrow in its viewe, for it favours female educa.
tion. The latter holds possession of the Dayánand College and is
thence also called the Aparkalli or College party as opposed to the
vegetarian or City party...
ÅSANDÁRI, syn. matdarí, a degree or order of the Gosains. The term is
applied to those settled in mats, as opposed to abdhút.
Asar, Asrá, Ját clans (agricultural) found in Multán,
Asiát, a clap of the Manj Rájputs.
Assá, see Asar.
Asram, a title found among Sanniásis.'
ASTÁWAR, a title found among Sanniásís.
ATAANGAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in the south of Multán tahsil,
where it settled from Jammu in Mughal times.
Attár, a dispensing druggist. “You get the drugs from the pansári, ana
take them to the attár to make up. He also makes arak aod sherbets.
He no longer makes itr (otto) which is only made by the gándi or.
perfumer." [D. C. J. I.].
AUGHÁN, Aghwán, synonyms for Afgbán, (q. v.).
AULA, a tribe of Játs descended from their eponym a Bajúal Rájpat and
found in Sialkot: also found in Montgomery where they are Mahammde
dans and classed as agricultural.
eating of for it favond Collected to th
Lobo



Aulakh-Awán.
AULAKH, Aurak, a Ját tribe, whose head-quarters would appear to be in the
Amritsar district, where they own a bárah of, originally, 12 villages, but
they are found in the northern Málwa, as well as in the Mánjha.
They are said to be of Solar descent, and their ancestor Aulakh lived
in the Manjha. But another story makes their ancestor one Raja Lúi
Lák, a Lunar Rajput. They are related to the Sekhu and Deo tribes
with whom they will not intermarry.
In Amritsar they give the following pedigree:
Ram Chandar
Kasab
Dhaul
Raghupat
Ude Rúp
Pura
Majang
Markhanb
Goe
Mandal
Dhaních
Aulakh.
This would make them akin to the Punnun. They are also found as
a Ját (agricultural) tribe west of the Rávi as far as Leiah. In Mont-
gomery they are both Hindu and Muhammadan. The Muhammadan
Aulakh of Leiah have a curious tale. Complaint was made to Humáyún
that Pír Muhammad Rájan drank bhang, in defiance of the Quranic
prohibition. So the emperor summoned the saint to Delhi and made
him walk along a narrow path beset with poisoned swords, while a
ferocious elephant pursued him. But as he walked the steel turned to
water and one of his disciples killed the elephant with a single blow of
his staff. Among the courtiers was Rája Aulakh, a Punwar Rajput,
who at once embraced Islám. The saint returned to Rájanpur, and
Aulakh followed him, conquered the country from the Balúu tribe and
gave it to the Pírs, on whom the emperor also conferred it in jáger,
though the Aulakh continued to administer it until about 175 years
ago, when their power declined.
AURAK, see Aulakh.
AORE, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
ADRAKZAI, a branch of the Afrídís in Tíráh. See Orakzai.
Awán.-The Awáns are an important tribe, exclusively Muhammadan,
chiefly found in the Salt Range, where they possess an Awánkárí,* but
also widely spread to the east, south and west of that tract. Extend.
LWAU.
* There is also an Awánkárí in Jullundur : Purser's S. R., § 42. And in Hoshiarpur
the Awáns hold a bára in the Dasuya pargana on the high level plain near Mukerian
P.N. Q. I., $ 465.



26
thenti a nondo y los faqur the Salt Rames Bangash an
Awán origins.
ing along the whole length of the Range from Jhelum to the Indus,
they are found in great numbers throughout the whole country be.
yond it up to the foot of the Sulemáns and the Safed Koh* ; though
in trans-Indus Bannu they partly, and in Dera Ismail Khan wholly,
merge in the Játs, a term which in those parts means little more
than a nondesoript pensant. In Peshawar the Awáns are included
in the hamsáya or faqir class. In Kohát towards Khushalgarh they
resemble the Awáns of the Salt Range, bat elsewhere in that Dis:rict
are hardly distinguishable from the Bangash and Niazais among
whom they live.
The independent possessions of the Awáns in the Salt Range
were once very considerable, and io its western and central portion
they are still the dominant race. As a dominant tribe the eastern
limits of their position conicide approximately with the western
border of the Chakwal and Pind Dadan Khán tahsils, but they have
also spread eastwards along the foot of the hills as far as the
Sutlej, and southwards down that river valley into Multan and Jhang.
They formerly held all the plain country at the foot of the western
Salt Range, but have been gradually driven up into the hills by
Pathans advancing from the Indus, and Tiwánas from the Jhelum.
The word Awán is not unplausibly derived from Ahwán, 'helper,'t
but various explanations of its origin are given. According to one
tradition the Awáns, who claim Arab origin, are descendants of Qutb
Sháh, himself duscended from Ali, and were attached to the Mu-
haminadan armies which invaded India as auxiliaries,'t whence their
name. In Kapúrthalá a more precise Version of their legend makes
them Alwi Sayyids, who oppressed by the Abbassides, sought refuge
in Sindh; and eventually allied themselves with Sabuktagin, who
bestowed on them the title of Awán. But in the best available account
of the tribes the Awáns are indeed said to be of Arabian origin and
descendants of Quth Shah, but he is said to have ruled Herát and
to have joined Mahmúd of Ghazni when he invaded India. With
him came six of his many sons : Gauhar Shah or Gorrara, who settled
near Sakesar : Kalan Shah or Kalgan who settled at Dhankot
(Kálábágh): Chauhan who colonised the hills near the Indus|| : Khokhar
or Muhammad Shah who settled on the Chenab: Tori and Jhajh
whose descendants are said to be still found in Tirah and elsewhere.
VE
* Raverty says ‘Awan-kárs' held the Karwán darra in Kurram, but none appear to be
found now in the Kurram Valley : Notes, p. 82.
† Another tradition is that when Zuhair went forth to fight with Basan, he left his wife,
then pregnant, with Zain-ul-ábidain in amán or 'trust,' whence her son's descendants are
called Awán. A curious variant of this appears in Talagang where it is said that Qutb
Sháb's descendant having lost all his song was bidden by a saint to place his next born son
in a potter's kiln 'on trust'. He did so, and after the kiln had been burnt the child was
taken out alive.
# For Awán as equivalent to Auxiliary we may compare ouergetai : McCrindle's Ancient
Indin, p. 38
S By Mr. W. S. Talbot in the Thelum Gazetteer, 1905, pp. 102-104. He disposes of
Cunningham's theory that Janjuás and Awáns were within historical times one race : (Arch.
Survey Reports, II 17 ff): and of Brandreth's theory that the Awáns, though recent immi.
grants into the Punjab, are descended from Bactrian Greeks. Mr. Talbot also mentions the
Gangs and Munds who are ganerally reckoned as Awáns, but who are probably only
affiliated indigenous clans,
i One of his descendants was Khattar, founder of the Khattars of Attock..
Possibly Turi is meant, and the Kurram Valley is referred to as their locality



Avân groups.
27
The originally Hindu character of these names is patent, and not
explained away by the tradition that Chauhan and Khokhar took their
mother's name.
In Gujrat tradition gives Qutb Shah three wives, from whom sprang
the Kbokhars and the four muhins or clans of the Awáps. By Barth,
his first wife, he had a son named Khokhar: by Sahd, he had Khuraſa
or Guraſa : and by Fateh Khatun, three sons--Kalgán, Chauhan and
Kundan.
These four clans are again divided into numerous septs, often bear-
ing eponymous rames, but sometimes the names of Gujar, Ját and
other tribal septs appear. Thus in Sialkot* the Awáns are said to
be divided into 24 muhins. But in Gujrát the Khuraſa clan comprises
21 sub-divisions, including such names as Jalap and Bhakri : the
Kalgán comprise 43 zub-divisions, including Dudiál, Andar, Papín
and others : tbe Chauhans have three septs, Ludain, Bhusin and
Ghuţtar : and the Kundán Chechi, Mahr, Malka, Mayán, Puchal and
Saroia. Few of these look like Muhammadan patronymics.
Note.-The Awáns in Kapúrthalá are said to have the following gots :-Kalgán (really a
muhin), Rai Dúl, Ghalli, Jand, Bágowali, Jaspál, Khokhar, Gobu or Gulistán, Harpál
and Khor Joti.
The Åwán septs give their names to several places-names, such as
Golera in Ráwalpindi, Khioſa (Khewra) in Jhelum, Bajára in Siálkot,
Jand, etc.
As claiming descent from Qutb Sháh the Awáns are often called
Qutb-shábi, and sometimes style themselves Ulami. In Gujrát they
only marry inter se, refusing to give daughters even to the Chibbs,
and not inter-marrying with the Khokbars. In Jbelum too “Awáns
give their daughters in marriage to Awáns only as a rule, though
there seems to be some instances of marriages with leading men of the
Chakwal tribes : it is said, however, that the Kálábágh Mallik refused
to betroth his daughter to Sardár Mubammd Ali, chief of the Ráwal.
pindi Ghebas. In some families at least, prominent Awáns not in-
frequently take to wife women of low tribes (usually having an Awán
wife also), and this practice does not seem to meet with as much
disapproval as in most other tribes of equal social standing : but
ordinarily Awán wives alone are taken.t Certain families marry with
certain other families only: and in all cases marriage is generally but
not necessarily within the múhí.”
* The Customary Law of this District (Volume XIV) p. 3, gives the following list of Awán
sub-clans :-
1 Bagwal
9 Harpál
17 Mangar
2 Bajra
| 10 Jalkhúh
18 Mirza
3 Biddar
11 Jand
19 Pappan
4 Chandhar
12 Jhán
20 Ropar
5 Chháila
13 Khambre
21 Salhi
6 Dhingle
| 14 Kharána
22 Sangwál
1 Ghulle
15 Malka
23 Saroya
8 Goraro
| 16 Mandú
44 Wadhal
Those in italics are returned as Khurara in Gujrát. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 9, 11, 14, 22 and 24
are classed as Kalgan.
+ In Ráwalpindi the children of a low-caste woman by an Awán are not considered true
Awing.



Awán---Arád.
This passage is entirely consistent with the popular classification
of the Awáns as zamindár or yeomen, in contradistinction to the sáhú
or gentry (Janjuas and Ghakkars), but on a level with the Mairs and
other leading tribes of Chakwal.
The leading family among the Awáns is that of the Malik of Ká.
lábágh, and throughout the Jhelum Salt Range they have numerous
Talks,* notably Lái Khán of Nurpur in Pind Didan Khán, head
of the Shiảl (descendants of Shihan, a great malik in the latter
part of the eighteonth century).
Like the Kassars, Janjuas and Khokhars, but unlike the Ghakkars,
the Awáns have the institution of sirdárí, whereby the eldest son
of a chief gets an extra share. In other respects their customs of
inheritance are closely alike those of the other Muhammadan tribes
among whom they live. In Shabpur and Jhelum, however, the
Awáns recognize a daughter's right to succeed.
In the Awán villages of Talagang tahsil all the graves have a
vertical slab at either end, while a woman's grave can be at once
distinguished by a smaller slab in the centre.f .
An Awán girl plaits her hair on the forehead and wears only
ear-drops, this style being given up after marriage. I Betrothal is
effected by the girl's father sending a bard or barber to the boy's
home with a few rupees and some sweets : or no ceremony at all
is observed.
Avísi, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
AYESHÉ, (heavenly), the namo of the ruling family of Hunzad : for the
legend of it: origin see Biddulph, Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh, p. 27.
Ázád, "free", a term applied to the be-shara or irregular orders of Islám
also called majzúb; opposed to sálik. Also used as a synonym for
Qalandar, Azáds hold that the shará or ritual law is only for the
masses, not for those who have attained marifat or full comprehension
of the Godhead.
* But Brandreth says the chief is called 'Rai,' and his younger brothers and sons "Malik.
Bottlement Report, § 49, p. 23.
† P. N. Q. I, § 584.
Ibid. II, § 382. Thoro is a history of tho Awaps in Urdu, publishod by Dr. Ghulam
Nabi of Lahoro,



APPENDIX.
M. Amin Chand's History of Sialkot gives a curious pedigree of the
Awáns which is tabulated below :-
MUHAMMAD
Zahir Qasim*
Ausl Shah-15th in descent
Qutb Shah
Wirj
Rai Rakh
Khokhar Ja!
bán
Mirza
Malik
Golera Kulugan
(16 families.)
Bindú
Saruba.
(? Saroia.)
Banjúr
Pusu
Hamír Túr
Progenitors of the Júháns of
Sialkot.t
Dengla Mandu
Bharahwin Samduh Singi
Kabambára.
* Another account makes Ausl Shah descended from Muhammad Khaifa, the Prophet's
son, by a woman of Janír.
† See article.Jún.
In Sialkot the Awans are known under these 4 branches :-Gohera [there is a tract i
the Ráwalpindi District still called Gubera, (or Gohera) after this tribe), Kahambára
Dongla and Mandú.



B
2 Bairágrees. Another Bahal had his head
BAB-A Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery and
Multán.
BÁBÁ LÁL Daryár, a sect, followers of a sádhú whose shrine is on the Cheráb
in the Wazirábád tahsil of Gujranwala and who miraculously turned
water into food.
BÁBá Lálí, a follower of one of several Bábá Láls. Bábá Lál Tahlíwála was
& Bairagi of Pind Dadan Khán who could turn dry sticks into rhisham
(tahli) trees. Another Bábá Lál had a famous controversy with Dárá
Shikoh.* Another Bábá Lál had his headquarters at Bhera, and yet
another has a shrine in Gurdáspar.
BABAR.--A small tribe allied to the Sheránis indeed said to be descended
from a son of Dom, a grandson of Sherál:ai. They are divided into
two main branches, Mansand and Ghora Khel. The former are sub-
divided into four and the latter into eight sub-divisions.
The Bábars are a civilised tribe and most of them can read and
write. They are devoted to commerce and are the wealthiest, quietest
and most honest tribe of the sub-Sulaimán plains. Edwardes called
them the most superior race in the whole of the trans-Iodus districts,
and the proverb says: 'A Bábar fool is a Gandapur sage.' Intensely
democratic, they have never had a recognised chief, and the tribe is
indeed a scattered one, many residing in Kandahar and other parts of
Khorásán as traders. A few are still engaged in the powinda traffic.
The Bábars appear to have occupied their present seats early in the
14tb century, driving out the Játs and Baloch (?) population from the
plains and then being pushed northward, by the Ushtarani proper.
Their centre is Chaudwan and their outlying villages are held by Ját
and Baloch tenants, as they cultivate little themselves.
BABBAB, a Ját tribe in Dera Gházi Khan--probably immigrants from the east
or aboriginal-and in Buháwalpur, where they give tbe following
genealogy:
RAJA KARAN.
this. Een dus inten
Kamdo.
Pargo.
Janjuhan,
Khakh,
Babbar. · Gabbar. Rabbar. Jhaggar.
BABLA, a section of the Bhatias, to which belong the chaudhris of Shujabad.
Multán Gr., 1902, p. 166.
BACHHAL, a tribe of Játs, found in pargana Bhirug, Naraingarh tahsil,
Ambála : descended from a Taoni Rájpút by his Ját wife.
BADAH.-A Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
* This sect is noticed in Wilson's sects of the Hindus.
+ A BẠbar, the Amin-Al-Mulk Nur Muhammad Khán, was Diwin-i-Kul-Mamlakát to
Taimúr Shah and gave a daughter to Shah Zamán Abdáli. Four Bábar families are also
settled in Multán: Gazetteer, 1901-02, p. 161.



Badanah Badú.
BADANAH, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BADDUN, see BADO.
BADEC88, a tribe of Játs, claiming to be Saroa Rájpáts by descent through
its eponym and his descendant Kúra Pál whose sons settled in Sialkot
under Shah Jahan : also found in Amritsar.
BADER, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BADGUJAR, BAR-, a class (or possibly rank) found among the Brahmans,
Rajputs, Meos and possibly other tribes, as well as often along with
Gújars. Thus the Bargújar Rájputs about Bhuodsi in Gurgaon border
on villages held by Gújars, and in one village there Gújars hold most of
the village and Bargújar Rajputs the rest. Similarly in Basdalla near
Púnahána in Gurgáon Meos hold most of the village and Gújars the
rest. (Sir J. Wilson, K.C.S.I., in P. N. Q. I., § 130). But according
to Ibbetson, the Bargújar are one of the 36 royal Rajput families, and
the only one except the Gahlot which claims descent from Láwa, son
of Rám Chandra. Their connection with the Mandahár is noticed
under Mandahár. They are of course of Solar race. Their old capital
was Rájor, the ruins of which are still to be seen in the south of Alwar,
and they held mnch of Alwar and the neighbouring parts of Jaipur tilí
dipossessed by the Kachwáha. Their head-quarters are now at
Anúpshahr on the Ganges, but there is still a colony of them in
Gurgaon on the Alwar border. Curiously enough, the Gurgaon
Bargújar say that they came from Jallundur about the middle of the
15th century; and it is certain that they are not very old holders of
their present capital of Sohna, as the buildings of the Kambohs who
beld it before them are still to be seen there and are of comparatively
recent date.
BADAAN OR PAKHAI, & tribe of Játs, claiming Saroa Rajput origin and
descended from an eponym through Kala, a resident of Jammu.
Found in Sialkot.
BADHAR, & Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BADHAUR, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
BADHI, a sept of Kanets found in Bashahr. They also own pargana Ghár
in Kuther.
BADAI, the carpenter who makes ploughs and other rude wood-work among
the Gaddis: (fr. badhná, to cut with an axe or saw). See Başhái.
Badi, a gipsy tribe which does not prostitute its women. The word is said
to be a corruption of Bází-(gar) q. v. Cf. Wâdia.
BADORAL, a tribe of Játs who offer food to their sati, at her shrine in Jasrán
in Nábha, at weddings; also milk on the 9th sudi in each month.
Found in Jind.
BADOZAI, a Pathán family, found in Multán the Derajat and Bahawalpur
State.
BADRO, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BADU, BADDUN, a gipsy tribe of Muhammadans, found in the Central Punjab,
chiefly in the upper valleys of the Sutlej and Beás, Like the Kehals



Badrum Báhman.
they are followers of Imam Sháfí* and by his teaching justify their
habit of eating crocodiles, tortoises and frogs. They are considered
outcast by other Muhammadans. They work in straw, make pipe-
bowls, their women bleed by cupping and they are also said to load
about bears and occasionally travel as pedlars. Apparently divided
into three clans, Wahlá, Dhará and Balara. Thoy claim Arab origin.
First cousins cannot intermarry. See Kehal.
BADWÁL, a Rajput clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
BADYE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BAGDAR, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BáchBÁN, BágawÁN, the Persian equivalent of the Hin di word Mali,
meaning a 'gardener,' and commonly used as equivalent to Aráin
in the Western Punjab, and even as far east as Lahore and Jullun-
dur. The Bághbáns do not form a caste and the term is merely
equivalent to Máli, Maliár, etc.
Baghela, lit. "tiger's whelp,” one of the main division of the Káthiás, whose
retainers or dependents they probably were originally. Coafined to
the neighbourhood of Kamália in Montgomery, and classed as Rajput
agricultural.
BAGBUR, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
BAGIYÁNA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BAGBAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BAGRÁNA, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
BágŘí,t (1) a term applied to any Hindu Rájput or Ját from the Bagar
or prairies of Bikáper, which lie to the south and west of Hissár in
contra distinction to Deswála. The Bágrís are most numerous
in the south of that District, but are also found in some numbers under
the heading of Ját in Sialkot and Patiala. In Gurdaspur the Bágri
are Salahria who describe themselves as Bágar or Bhagar by clan.
and probably have no connection with the Bágri of Hissar and its
neighbourhood. (2) a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BAHÁDARKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery: also a
Joiya sept.
Bahálí, a Rajput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Banár, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BAHI, a tribe of Patháns which holds a bára of 12 villages near toshibra
pur, (should be verified ?).
Báhman, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Ou-
* This said that in the time of the Prophet there were four brothers, Imám Azam
Imám Hamil, Imam Shafi, and Imám Náik, and Sbaikh Dbamár
the Badús, was a follower of this Imám Sháfi. Once Shaikh Dhamma
act which was reprobated by three of the brothers, bat Imam Shafi
the animal whereupon the tbree Imáme called him bad and hence bis
duct, the Shaikh ate the animal whereupon the tbree Imáme called his
Such is the Badú legend, but the four Imáms were not
descendants are called Badú! Such is the Badú legend, but the four Ima
brothers nor were they contempo
SENATO NA WATA TAAV contemporaries of the Prophet, and Hamil is a commune:
tio donbtful whetbar Bágri is not applicable to any Hindu from the Bågar and
not merely to Rajputs and Játs. It is, however, specially applied to Játs (q. v.). In
nur it is applied to any Hindu or Muhammadan from Jaisalmer or Bikáner who
speaks Bágri.



34
Bahriwul-Bahti.
BABNIWÁL, a Ját tribe, found chiefly in Hissar and Patiala. They are also
fourd on the lower Sutlej in Montgomery, where in 1881 they probably
returned themselves as Bhatti Rajputs, which they claim to be by de-
scent. In Hissár they appear to be a Bágri trihe, though they claim to
be Deswáli, and to have been Chauhans of Sambhar in Rajputána whence
they spread into Bikáner and Sirsa. Mr. Purser says of them:-"In
numbers they are weak; but in love of robbery they yield to none of
the tribes." They gave much trouble in 1857. In the 15th century
the Bahuiwál held one of the six cantons into which Bikaner was then
divided.
BAHOKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BaHowáná, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
BAARÚPIA.-- Bahrúpia is in its origin a purely occupational terın derived
from the Sanskrit bahu 'many' and rúpa form,' and denotes an
actor, a mimic, one who assumes many forins or characters, or engages
in many occupations. One of the favourite devices of the Bahrúpias
is to ask for money, and when it is refused, to ask that it may be
given on condition of the Bahrúpia succeeding in deceiving the
person who refuses it. Some days later the Bahrúpia will again visit
the house in the disguise of a pedlar, a milkman, or what not, sell
his goods without being detected, throw off his disguise, and claim the
stipulated reward. They may be drawn from any caste, and in
Rohtak there are Chúbộa Bahrúpias. But in some districts a family
or colony of Bahrúpias has obtained land and settled down on it, and
so become a caste as much as any other. Thus there is a Bahrúpia
family in Pápípat which holds a village revenue-free, though it now
professes to be Shaikh. In Sialkot and Gujrat Mabtams are commonly
known as Babrúpias. In the latter District the Bahrúpias claim con-
nection with the Rájás of Chittaur and say they accompanied Akbar in
an expedition against the Patháns. After that they settled down to
cultivation* on the banks of the Chenáb. They have four clans-
Rathaur, Chauhan, Punwár and Sapáwat-which are said not to in-
termarry. All are Sikhs in this District. Elsewhere they are Hindus or
Muhammadans, actors, mountebanks and sometimes cheats. The
Bahrúpias of Gurdaspur are said to work in cane and bamboo.
The Bahrúpia is distinct from the Bhánd, and the Bahrúpia villages
on the Sutlej in Phillaur tahsil have no connection with the Mahtons
of Hoshiarpur.† Bahrúpias are often found in wandering gangs.
Bántí, a term used in the eastern, as Cháng is used in the western, portion
of the lower ranges of the Kángra Hills and Hosbiárpur as equivaleot
to Ghirth. All of them intermarry.
BABTI, bill men of fairly good caste, who cultivate and own land largely;
and also work as labourers. They are said to be degraded Rájputs.
In Hoshiarpur (except Dasúya) and Jullundur they are called Bahti ;
in Dasúya and Núrpúr Cháng; in Kángra Ghirth; all intermarry freely.
In the census of 1881 all three were classed as Bahtí. The Cháng are
also said to be a low caste of labourers in the hills who also ply as
muleteers.
45 Salgs.
* As cultivators they are thrifty and ambitious. They also make baskets, roper and
rope-betstranggars, and chikkas in Gujrát,
† P. N. Q. I., § 1034,



Baid-Bairagi.
35
BAID, a got of the Oswal Bhábrás, Muhiál Bralımans and other castes : also
a physician, a term applied generaly to all who practise Vedic me-
dicine.
Baldwán,* an important Hindu-Sikh Ját tribe in Ambála.
Bains, á Ját tribe, whose head.quarters appear to be in Hoshiarpurt and
Jullundur, though they have spread westwards even as far as Ráwal-
pindi, and enstwards into Ambála and the adjoining Native States.
They say that they are by origin Janjúa Rájputs, and that their ances-
tor Bains came eastwards in the time of Firoz Shah. Bains is one of
the 36 royal families of Rajputs, but Tod believes that it is merely a
sab-division of the Súryabansi section. They give their name to Bais-
wára, or the easternmost portion of the Ganges-Jamna doáb. The
Sardárs of Aláwalpur in Jullundur are Baics, whose ancestor came
from Hoshiarpur to Jalla near Sirhind in Nábha some twelve genera-
tions ago.
The Barrági.
BAIRÁGÍ. -The Bairagi (Vairágí, more correctly, from Sanskſ. vairágya,
devoid of passion,') is a devotee of Vis nu. The Bairagis probably
represent a very old element in Indian religion, for those of the sect
who wear a leopard-skin doubtless do so as personating Nar Singh,
the leopard incarnation of Vishnu, just as the Bhagnutí fagir imitates
the dress,t dance, etc., of Krishna. The priest who personates the
god whom he worships is found in almost every rude religion : while
in later cults the old rite survives at least in the religious use of animal
masks,'$ a practice still to be found in Tibet. There is, moreover, an
undoubted pun on the word bhrág, leopard', and Bairagí, and this
possibly accounts for the wearing of the leopard skin. The feminine
form of Bairágí, bairágan, is the term applied to the tau-shaped crutch
on which a devotee leans, either sitting or standing, to the small
enblematic crutch about a foot long, and to the crutch hilt of a sword
or dagger. In Jind the Bairági is said to be also called Shámí.
The orders devoted to the cults of Rám and Krishn are known
generically as Bairágís, and their history commences with Rámánúja,
who taught in Southern India in the 11-12th centuries, and from bis
name the designation Rámánáji may be derived. But it is not until
the time of Rámánand, i.e., until the end of the 14th century, that the
sect rose to power or importance in Northern India.
The Bairágís are divided into four main orders (sampardas), viz.,
Rámánandí, Vishnuswámí, Nímánandi and Madhavachárí.
rear a incarnation of Krishin almost in the role
is, more and thix
* Fancifully derived from baid, a physician-who rescued a bride of the clan from
robbers and was rewarded by their adopting his name.
† l'he Bains hold a bárah or groop of 12 (notually 15 or 16) villages near Mabilpar in
this District.
| Trumpp's Adi-Granth, p. 98.
ſ Robertson Smith : Religion of the Somites, p. 437.
i see Ibbetson, $ 521: where the Rámánájis are said to worship Mahádeo and thus ap.
pear to be Shaivas. Further the Bairágís are there said to have been founded by Sri
Anand, the 12th disciple of Rámánand, The termination nandi appears to be connected
with his name.'
It is only to the followers of Rámánand or his contemporaries that the term Bairagi is
properly applied.



The Bairagi caste.
Of these the first-named contains six of the 52 dwárás* (schools) of
these Bairágí orders, viz., the Anbhímandi, Dundárám, Agarjí, Telájí,
Kubbájí, and Ramsalují.
In the Punjab only two of the four sampardás are usually found.
There are (i) the Rámánandis, who like the Vishnuswámís are devotees
of Rámchandr, and accordingly celebrate his birthday, the Rámnaumi,t
study the Rámáyaná and make pilgrimages to Ajudbiá: their insignia
being the tar pundri or trident, marked on the forehead in white, with
the central prong in red or white.
The only other group found in the Punjab is (ii) the Nímánandi, who,
like the Madhavachárís, are devotees of Krishna. They too celebrate
the 8th of Bhadon as the date of Krishna's incarnation, but they study
the Sri Madh Bhagwat and the Gíta, and regard Bindraban, Mathra
and Dwárkánáth as sacred places. On their foreheads they wear a two-
pronged fork, | all in white.
In the Punjab proper, however, even the distinction between Ráma
and Nima-nandí is of no importance, and probably hardly known. In
parts of the country the Bairágís form a veritable caste being allowed
to marry, aod (e.g.) in Sirsa they are hardly to be distinguished from
ordinary peasants, while in Karnál many (excluding the sádhús or
monks of the monasteries, asthal, whose property descends to their
spiritual children) marry and their bindu or natural children succeed
them. This latter class is mainly recruited from the Játs, but the
caste is also recruited from the three twice-born castes, the disciple
being received into his guru's sampardá and dwára. In some tracts,
e. g, in Jind, the Bairágís are mostly secular. They avoid in marriage
their own samparda and their mother's dwàra. In theory any Bairági
may take food from any other Bairagi, but in practice a Brahman
Bairágí will only eat from the hands of another Brahman, and it is
only at the ghostí or place of religious assembly that recruits of all
castes can eat together. The restrictions regarding food and drink are
however lax throughout the order. Though the Bairagis, as a rule,
abstain from flesh and spirits, the secular members of the caste certainly
do not. In the southern Punjab the Bairágí is often addicted to bhang
To return to the Bairágís as an order, it would appear that as a
body they keep the jata or long hair, wear coarse loin-cloths and
usually affect the suffix Dás. As opposed to the Sanissís, or Lal-padrís,
they style themselves Sítá-pádrís, as worshippers of Sítá Rám.
*It may be conjectured that the Valabhacháris, Bígánandís, and Nimi-Kharak-swámís aro
three of these dwárás : or the latter term may be equivalent to Nímánandí. Possibly the
Sítá-pádrís are really a modern dwára. The Rádha-balabhi, who affect Krishna's wife
Rádba, can hardly be anything but a dwára,
† The 9th of Bhadon.
Its shape is said to be derived from the figure of the Nar Singh (man-lion) incarnation
which tore Prablád to pieces.
$ Called nadí, is contradistinction to bindu children. Celibate Bairágís are called Nágas,
the secular ghar-bárt or ghiristi, i.e., house holders.
|| It is not clear how property descends, e.g., it is said that if a gurú marry his property
descends on his death to his disciples, in Jiná (just as it does in Karnál). But apparently
property inherited from the natural family devolves on the natural children, while that in-
herited from the gurú descends to the chela. In the Kaithal tahsil of Karnál the agricultural
Bairagis who own the village of Dig are purely secular,
But men of any caste may become Bairágís and the order appears, as a rule, to be re-
cruited from the lower castes.



Ton the rigihe gopi chang he must, tra relating this, tho
Bairági developments.
As regards his tenete a Bairagi is sometimes said to be subject to
five rules :- ) he must journey to Dwárká and there be branded with
iron on the right arm :* (ii) he must mark his forehead, as already
described, with the gopi chandan clay : (ii) he must invoke one of the
incarnations of Krishna: (iv) he must wear a rosary of tulsi : and (v)
he should know and repeat some mantra relating to one of Vishnu's
incarnations. Probably these tenets vary in details, though not in
principle, for each samparda, and possibly for each dwára also.
The monastic communities of the Bairágís are powerful and ex-
ceedingly well conducted, often very wealthy, and exercise much
hospitality. They are numerous in Hoshiárpur. Some of their mahants
are well educated and even learned men, and a few possess a knowledge
of Sanskrit.
BAIBÁGÍ DEVELOPMENTS.
The intense vitality of the Bairági teachings may be gauged from the
pamber of sob-sects to which they have given birth. Among these may
be noted the Hari-Dásís (in Rohtak), the Kesho-panthist (in Multán),
the Tulsi-Dásís, Gujranwálá, the Murár-panthist, the Bábá-Lálís.
The connection of the earliest form of Sikhism with the Bairági
doctrines is obscure, but it is clear that it was a close one, Kalladbárí,
the ancestor of the Bedí family of Ona, was also the predecessor of
the Brahman Kalladhárí mahants of Dharmsál in the Una tahsil, who
are Bairagis, as well as followers of Nának, whence they are called
Vaisha v-Nának-panthí. This community was founded by one Nakodar
Dás who in his youth was absorbed in the deity while lying in the
shade of a banyan tree instead of tending bis cattle, and at last,
after a prolonged period of adoration, disappeared into the unknown.
Another Bairágí, Rám Thamman, was a cousio of Nának and is some.
times claimed as his follower. His tark near Lahore is the scope of a
fair, held at the Baisák hí, and formerly notorious for disturbances
and, it is said, immoralities. It is still a great meeting point for
Bairagi ascetics. Further it will not be forgotten that Banda, the
successor of the Sikh gurús, was, originally, a Bairágí, while two
Bairágí sub-sects (the Sarndásí and Simrandásís) are sometimes classed
as Udásís.
A modern offshoot of the Bairágís are the Charandásís, founded by
one Charan Dás who was born at Dehra in Alwar State in 1703.). His
father was a Dhúsar who died wben his son, then named Ranjit Singh,
was ooly 5. Brought up by relations at Delhi the boy became a
* These brands include the conch shell (shank), discus or chakkar, club or gada, and lotus.
Besides the iron brands (tapt mudra, lit. fire-marks) water-marks (sital mudra, lit. cold.
marks) are also used. Further the initiatory rite, though often performed at Dwarká, may
be performed anywhere especially in the guru's house. Some Bairagis even brand their
women's arms before they will eat or drink anything touched by them.
† Probably worshippers of a local saint or of Krishna himself.
Possibly followers of a Bábá Murár wbose shrine is in Lahore District, or worshippers
of Krishn Murárí, i.e., the enemy of Mur, a demon.
& Sometimes said to be one and the same. Simran Dás was a Brahman, who lived two
centuries ago, and his followers are Gosáíns who wear the tulsi necklace and worship their
guru's bed.
ll Another account says he became 'Sukhdeo's disciple at the age of 10 in Sbt. 1708,
1651 A. D. For å full account of the sect 800 Wilson's gpoted in Maclagan's, Punjab Census
Report, 1891, p. 121.



38
Bairagi-Bajra.
disciple of Sukhdeo Das, himself a spiritual descendant of Biásjí, in
Muzaffarnagar, and assumed the name of Charan Dás. He taught
the unity of God, proached abolition of caste and inculcated purity of
life. His three principal disciples, Swámí Rám-rúp, Jagtán Gosáin
and a woman named Shahgoleai ench founded a monastery in Delhi,
in which city there is also a temple dedicated to Charan Dás where the
impression of his foot (charan) is worshipped.* His initiates are celibate
and worship Krishna and his favourite queen Rádha above all gods and
goddesses. They wear on the forehead the joti sarup or "body of
flame," which consists of a single perpendicular line of white ;t and
dress in saffron clothes with a tulsi necklace. The chief scripture
of the sect is the Bhagat-ságar, and the 11th day of each fortnight is
kept as a fast. Charan Dás is believed to have displayed miracles
before Nadir Shah, on his conquest of Delhi, and however that may be,
his disciples obtained grants of land from the Mughal emperors which
they still hold.
BAIRWÁL, a tribe of Játs who claim to be descendants of Birkhman, a
Chauhan Rajput, whose son married a Ját girl as his second wife and
so lost status. The name is eponymous, and they are found in the
Báwal Nizámat of Nábha.
BAISTOLA, a Jain sect: see Jain.
Baizal, one of the two clans of the Akozai Yusafzai. It originally held
the Lundkhwár valley, in the centre of the northernmost part of
Pesháwar, and all the eastern hill country between that and the Swát
river, It still holds the bills, but the Khattak now hold all the west of
the valley and the Utmán Khel its north-east corner so that the Baizai
only hold a small tract to the south of these tost. Their six
septs are the Abba and Aziz Khels, the Bábozai, Matorezai, Musa
and Zangi Khels. The last lies south of the lam range which
divides Swát from Buner. Only the three first-named hold land in
British territory.
BAJÁR, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BAJÁRAH, vae of the 15 Awán families descended from Kulugan, son of Qutb
Sháh: see History of Siálkot, p. 37.
BAJO, Bajjú, a Rájpút tribe found in Siálkot and allied to the Bajwa
Játs.
Bájwá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Sialkot, Amritsar and Multán, and
as a Hindu Ját clan in Montgomery. The Bajwá Játs are of the same
kin as the Bajjú Rájpúts. In Sialkot they have the customs of rusoa
or lagan and bhoja twixt betrothal and marriage.
The jathera of the Bájwá is Babá Mángá, and he is revered at
weddings, at which the rites of jandian and chhatra are also
observed,
The Bájwa Játs and Bajjú Rájpúts have given their name to the Bajwát
or country at the foot of the Jammu hills in the Sialkot District.
They say that they are Solar Rájputs and that their ancestor Rájá
* Clearly there is some connection here with the Vishnupad or foot-impression of Vishnu.
of It is also called simply sarup, or “body” of Bhagwán.
# It might be suggested that wá is a diminutive form.



Bájwa-Bakhtiar.
39
Shalíp was driven out of Multán in the time of Sikandar Lodi. His
two sons Kals and Lís escaped in the disguise of falconers. Lís went
to Jaminu and there married a Kátil Rájput bride, while Kals married
a Ját girl in Pasrúr. The descendants of both live in the Bajwát, but
are said to be distinguished as Bajjú Rájputs and Bajwa Játs.
Another story has it that their ancestor Jas or Rai Jaisan was driven
from Delhi by Rai Pitora and settled at Karbalá in Siálkot. Yet
another tale is that Naru, Rájá of Jammú, gave him 84 villages in
ilága Ghol for killing Mír Jagwa, a mighty Pathán. The Bajjú
Rájputs admit their relationship with the Bajwa Játs. Kals had a
son, Dáwa, whose son Dewa had three sons, Muda, Wasr, and Nána
surnamed Chachrah. Nána's children having all died, he was told by
an astrologer that only those born under a chachrí tree would live.
His advice was taken and Nana's next son founded the Chachrah sept,
chiefly found near Narowal. The Bajjú Rájputs have the custom
of chúndavand and are said to marry their daughters to Chibh
Bhau and Manhás Rájputs, and their sops to Rájputs. The Bajjú
Rájputs are said to have had till quite lately a custom by which a
Mussalman girl could be turned into a Hindu for purposes of
marriage, by temporarily burying her in an underground chamber and
ploughing the earth over her head. In the betrothals of this tribe
dates are used, a custom perhaps brought with them from Multán, and
they have several other singular customs resembling those of the Sábi
Játs. They are almost confined to Sialkot, though they have spread
in small numbers eastwards as far as Patiala.
BAKARKí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BAKAAR, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BAKKHAR, an agricultural clan found in Shábpur.
BAKARI, a clan found in the Shabr Farid ilága of Bahawalpur. They claim
to be Sumrás by origin, and bave Cháran bards, which points to a
Rájput origin. They migrated from Bhakhkhar to Multán, there
they were converted to Islám by Gaus Bahá-ud-Din Zakaría, and
fearing to return to their Hindu kinsmen settled down in Multán
as weavers. Thence they migrated to Núrpur, Pákpattan and other
places, and Farid Khan I settled some of them in Shahr Farid. from
Núrpur. They make lungis. (The correct form is probably Bhàkhri).
BAKESHIÁL, a family of Wahora Khatris, settled at Bhaun in Jhelum, which
has a tradition of military service.
BAKHTIÁR, a small Pathán tribe of Persian origin who are associated with the
Mián Khel Patháns of Dera Ismail Khán, and now form one of their
principal sections.
Raverty however disputes this, and ascribes to the Bakhtiars &
Sayyid origin. Shirán, the eponym of the Shirami Patháns, gave a
daughter to a Sayyid Ishaq whose son by her was named Habíb the
Abú-Sa'íd, or 'Fortunate' (Bakhtyár). This son was adopted by his
step-father Miánai, son of Dom, a son of Shiraz. The Bakhtiárs have
produced several saints, among them the Makhdúm-i-'Alam, Khwaja
Yahya-i-Kabír, son of Khwaja ſliás, son of Sayyid Muhammad, and a
contemporary of Sultán Mahammad Tughluq Sháh. He died in
of Wabon servicersian origi, and no



BaAntidBalka.
1333 A. D., and his descendants are called Shaikhzais. Raverty says
the Persian Bakhtiáris* are quite distinct from the Bakhtiárg.
BAKHTMAL sádhs, a Sikh sect founded by one Bakhtmal. When Gurú Govind
Singh destroyed the masands or tax-gatherers one of them, by name
Bakhtmal, took refuge with Mátá, a Gujar woman who disguised him
in woman's clothes, putting bangles on his wrists and a nath or n08e-
ring in his nose. This attire he adopted permanently and the mahant
of his gaddi still, wears bangles. His followers are said to be also
called Bakhshish sádhs, but this is open to doubt. The head-quarters
of the sect appears to be unknown.
BAL, a Ját tribe of the Biás and Upper Satlej, said to be a clan of the
Sekba tribe with whom they do not intermarry. Their ancestor is also
said to have been named Baya Bal, & Rájput who came from
Málwa. The name Bal, which means "strength," is a famous one in
ancient Indian history, and redurs in all sorts of forms and places.
In Amritsar they say they came from Ballamgarh, and do not intor-
marry with the Dhillon.
BAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BALAQAN, a tribe of Játs, claiming to be Jammu Rájputs by descent from
their eponym. Found in Siálkot.
BALÁHAB, in Gurgaon the baláhar (in Sirsa he is called daurå) is a villago
menial who shows travellers the way, carries messages and letters, and
summons people when wanted by the headmen. In Karnál he is called
lehbart; but is not a recogoised menial and any one can perform his
duties on occasion. In Sirsa, Gurgaon and Karnál he is almost always
a Chúbra, cf. Batavál.
BALÁRI, BALái, cf. baláhur.-In Delhi and Hissár a chaukidár or watobman :
in Sirsa a Chamár employed to manure fields, or who takes to syce's
and general work, is so termed.
BALBIR, à sept of Kanets which migrated from Cbittor in Rajputána
with the founders of Keonghal and settled in the latter State. The
founders of Keonthal were also accompanied by a Oháik, a Saláthi and
a Pakrot, all Brahmans, a Chhibar Kanet, a blacksmith and & turi
and the descendants of all these are still settled in the State or in its
employ.
BALTAROSH, a synonym for Bhát (Ráwalpindi).
BALHAM, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Báli, an agricoltural clan found in Shábpur.
Báli, a section of the Muhíáls (Brabmans) : corr. to the Dhannapotras of
the South-West Punjab.
Balká, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur: balká in the east of the
Punjab is used as equivalent to chela, for the disciple of a faqir.'
* There is said to be a sept of the Baloch of this name in Bahawalpur and Muzattargarh,
on both sides of the Panjnad.
+ Or rehbar, probably from ráhtar, 'guide.' In Karnál is no Ballhar caste, the
term being applied to a sweeper who does this particular kind of corvée-which no one but
a sweeper (or in default a Dh&park) will perform.



Bálmiktm Baloch.
41
Bálmiki, VÁLmiki.-The sect of the Chuhļas, synonymous with Bélásháhi
and Lálbegi, so called from Bálmik, Bálrikh or Bálá Sbáh, possibly the
same as the author of the Ramayana.* Bálmík, the poet, was a man
of low extraction, and legend represents him as a low-caste hunter
of the Nárdak in Karnál, or' & Bhíl highway-man converted by a
saint whom he was about to rob. One legend makes him a sweeper
in the heavenly courts, another as living in austerity at Ghazni.
Soe ander Lálbegí.
Balo, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BALOCH..
MEANING OF BALOCH.
The term Baloch is used in several different ways. By travellers
and historians it is employed to denote () the race known to themselves
and their neighbours as the Baloch, and (ii) in an exiended sense as
including all the races inhabiting the great geographical area shown on
our maps as Balochistan. In the latter sense it comprises the Brahuis,
a tribe which is certainly not of Baloch origin. In the former sense it
includes all the Buloch tribes, whether found in Persia on the west or
the Punjab on the east, which can claim a descunt, more or less pure,
from Baloch ancestors. Two special uses of the term also require
notice. In the great jungles below Thánesar in the Karnal district is
settled a criminal tribe, almost certainly of Baloch extraction, which
will be noticed below page 55.7 Secondly, throughout the Punjab,
except in the extreme west and the extreme east, the term Baloch
denotes any Muhammadan camel-man. Throughout the upper grazing
grounds of the Western Plains the Baloch settlers have taken to the graz-
ing and breeding of camels rather than to husbandry; and thus the
word Baloch has become associated with the care of camels, insomuch
that in the greater part of the Punjab, the word Baloch is used for any
Musalman camel-man whatever be his caste, every Baloch being supposed
to be a camel-inan and every Muhammadan camel-man to be a Baloch.
OrigiNS OF THE BALOCH.
Pottinger and Khanikoff claimed for the Baloch race a Turkoman
origin, and Sir T. Holdich and others an Arab descent. Bellew
designed them Rájput descent on very inadequate philological grounds,
while Burton, Lassen and others have maintained that they are, at
least in the mass, of Iranian race. This last theory is supported by
Mr. Longworth Dames who shows that the Baloch came into their
present locations in Mekran and on the Indian border from parts of
the Iranian plateau further to the west and north, bringing with them
a language of tbe Old Persian stock, with many features derived from
the Zend or Old Bactrian rather than the Western Persian.
HISTORY OF THE Baloch.
Dames assigns the first mention of the Baloch in history
to the Arabic chronicles of the 10th century A. D., but Firdausi
(c. 400 A.H.) refers to a still earlier period, and in his Shah-námaf the
Baloches are described as forming part of the armies of Rai Káús
Temple (in Legends of the Punjab, I, p. 529) accepts this tradition and says Bálmiki
is the same as Bálá Sháb or Núri bál Bálá, but assigns to hia, 'the place next to
Lál Beg.'
+ This group is also found in Ambála, and the Giloi Baloch of Lyallpur are also said to be
an offshoot of it.
180 Dames, but the text of the Shah-náma is very corrupt, and the reading Khoch “crost"
cannot be relied upon implicity.



42
Baloch history.
and Kai Khusrao. The poem says that the army of Ashkash was
from the wanderers of the Kooh and Baloch, intent on war, with
exalted cockscorb crests, whose back done in the world ever saw.
Under Naushírwán, the Chosroos who fought against Justinian, the
Baloch are again mentioned as mountaineers who raided his kingdom
and had to be exterminated, though later on we find them serving in
Nausbírwán's own army. In these passages their association with the
men of Gil and Dailám (the peoples of Gílán and Adharbaijan) would
appear to locate the Baloch in a province north of Karcán towards the
Caspian Sea.
However this may be, the commencement of the 4th century of the
Hijra and of the 10th A.D. finds the Balús or Baloch established in
Karmán, with, if Masodi can be trusted, tbe Qufs. (Koch) and the
Zutt (Jatts). The Baloch are then described as holding the desert
plains south of the mountaios aud towards Makrán and the sea, but
they appear in reality to have infested the desert now known as the
Lut, which lies north and east of Karman and separates it from
Khorásán and Sistán, Thence they crossed the desert into the two
last-named provinces, and two districts of Sistán were in Istakhri's time
known as Baloch country.* Baloch raiders plundered Mahmúd of
Ghazpi's ambassador between Tabbas and Khabis, and in revenge his
son Masúd defeated them at the latter place, which lies at the foot of
the Karmán Mountains on the edge of the desert.
About this time Firdausi wrote and soon after it the Baloch must
have migrated bodily from Karmán into Mekrán and the Siodh
frootier, after a partial and temporary halt in Sistán. With great
probability Dames conjectures that at this period two movements of the
Baloch took place : the first, corresponding with the Saljuq invasion
and the overthrow of the Dailami and Ghaznawí power in Persia,
being their abandonment of Karman and settlement in Sistán and
Western Makrán; while the second, towards Eastern Makrán and the
Sindh border, was contemporaneous with Changiz Khán's ip yasion and
the wanderings of Jalál-ud-Din in Makrán.
To this second movement the Baloch owed their opportunity of
invading the Indus valley; and thence, in their third and last
migration, a great portion of the race was precipitated into the Punjab
plains.
It is now possible to connect the traditional history of the Baloch
themselves, as told in their ancient heroic ballads, with the above
account. Like other Muhammadan races, the Baloch claim Arabian
extraction, asserting that they are descended from Mir Hamza, ap
uncle of the Prophet, and from a fairy (pari). They consistently
place their first settlement in Halab (Aleppo), where they remained
until, siding with the sons of Ali and taking part in the battle of
Karbalá, they were expelled by Yazid, the second of the Omayyad
Caliphs, in 680 A.D. Thence they fed, first to Karmán, and eventually
* Their settlements may indeed have extended into Khorisan. Even at the present day
there is a considerable Baloch population & far north 4,8 Turbat-i-Haidari (Curzon's
Persia, 1892, 1, p. 203),



Baloch history.
13
to Sístán where they were hospitably received by Shams-ud-Din,*
ruler of that country. His successor, Badr-ud-Din, demanded, according
to eastern usage, a bride from each of the 44 bolaks or clans of the
Baloch. But the Baloch race had never get paid tribate in this form
to any ruler, and they sent therefore 44 boys dressed in girls' clothes
and fled before the deception could be discovered. Badr-ud-Din sent
the boys back but pursued the Baloch, who had fled south-eastwards,
into Kech-Makrán where he was defeated at their hands.
At this period Mír Jalál Khán, son of Jiand, was ruler of all the
Baloch. He left four sons, Rind, Láshár, Hot and Koráí from whom
are descended the Rind, Lashárí, Hot and Korái tribes; and a son-in-
law, Murád, from whom are descended the Jatoit or children of Jato,
Jalal Khán's daughter. Unfortunately, however, certain tribes
cannot be brought into any of these five, and in order to provide
them with ancestors two more sons, Ali and Bulo, ancestor of the
Buledhi, have had to be found for Jalál Khán. From Ali's two sons,
Ghazan and Umar, are descended the Ghazani Marrís and the
scattered Umránís.
Tradition avers that Jalál Khan had appointed Rind to the phágh
or turban of chiefship, but that Hot refused to join him in creating
the ásrokh or memorial canopy to their father. Thereupon each per:
formed that ceremony separately and thus there were five ásrókhs
in Kech. But it is far more probable that five principal gatherings
of clans were formed under well-known leaders, each of which brcame
known by some nickname or epithet, such as rind “cheat," hot,
"warrior," Lashárí, “men of Láshár" and, later, Bulodhi, "men of
Boleda." To these other clans became in the course of time affiliated.
A typical example of an affiliated clan is afforded by the Dodái, a
clan of Ját race whose origin is thus described :-
Dodáf Sumra, expelled from Thatha by his brethren, escaped by
swimming his mare across the Indus, and, half frozen, reached the
hut of Sálhe, a Rind. To revive him Sálhe placed him under the
blankets with his daughter Mudho, whom he eventually married.
“For the woman's sake," says the proverb, “the man became a Baloch
who had been a Jaţt, a Jaghdal, à nobody; he dwelt at Harraod
under the hills, and fate made him chief of all.” Thus Dodá founded
the great Dodái tribe of the Baloch, and Gorish, his son, founded
the Gorshání or Gurchání, now the principal tribe of Dodái origin.
The great Mirráni tribe, which for 200 years gave chiefs to Dera
Gháại Khán, was also of Dodạí origin.
* According to Dames there was a Shams-ud-Din, independent malik of Sistán, who
claimed descent from the Saffáris of Persia and who died in 1164 A.D. (559 H.) or nearly
500 years after the Baloch migration from Aleppo. Badr-ud-Din appears to be unknown
to history.
† It is suggested that Jatoi or husband of a Ját woman,' just as bahnoi means 'husband
of a sister,' although in Jatoi the t is soft.
I Dodá, a common name among the Sumrás whose dynasty ruled Sindh until it was
overthrown by the Sammas. About 1250 A.D. or before that year we find Baloch adventurers
first allied with the Sodhás and Jharejás, and then supporting Dodá IV, Sumra. Undor
Umar, his successor, the Baloches are found combining with the Sammas, Sodhás and
Jatts, (Jharojas), but were eventually forced back to the hills without effecting any perma
Dent lodgment in the plains.



Baloch history.
Sindh. Don this new movemaimed a vague tively held abi. Me
indirect
pe de pestera i dynastiethed homes called
Malikinya jäin Langehstablished ihestablished held by om te probe
Bar
After the overthrow of the Sumrás of Sindh nothing is heard of
the Baloch for 150 years and then in the reigo of Jám Tughlaq, the
Samná (1423—50), they are recorded as raiding near Bhakhar in
Sindh. Doubtless, as Dames holds, Taimur's invasion of 1399 led
indirectly to this new movement. The Delhi empire was at its weakost
and Taipur's descendants claimed a vague suz-reignty over it. Prob.
ably all the Western Punjab was effectively held by Mughal in-
toudants until the Lodi dynasty was established in 1451. Meanwhile
the Langáh Rájputs had established themselves on the throne of Multán
and Shah Husain Langáh (1409-1502) called in Baloch mercenaries,
granting & jagir, which extended from Kot Karor to Dhankot, to
Malik Sohráb Dodái who came to Multán with his sons, Gházi Khán,
Fath Khan and Ismail Kbán.*
But the Dodáí were not the only mercenaries of the Langáhg.
Shah Hussain had conferred the jágirs of Uch and Shor(kot) on two
Sammá brothers, Jám Báyazid and Jám Ibrahim, between whom and
the Dodáis a feud arose on Shah Mahmúd's accession. The Jáms
promptly allied themselves with Mír Chakor, a Rind Baloch of Síbí
who had also sought service and lands from the Langáh ruler and
thereby roused the Dodáis' jealousy. Mir Chákur is the greatest figure
in the heroic poetry of the Baloch, and his history is a remarkable
one. The Rinds were at picturesque but deadly feud with the Lashárís.
Gohar, the fair owner of vast herds of camels favoured Chákur, but
Gwabarám Lasbári also claimed her hand. The rivals agreed to decide
their quarrel by borse race, but the Rinds loosened the girths of
Gwaharám's saddle and Chákur won. In revenge the Lusháris killed
some of Gohai's camels, and this led to a desperate 30 years' war
wbich ended in Chákur's expulsion from Síbí in spite of aid invoked
and received from the Arghún conquerors of Sindh. Mír Chákur was
accompanied by many Riods and by his two sons, Shahzadt and
Shaihak, and received in jágir lands near Uch from Jám Bayazid,
Sammá. Later, however, he is said in the legends to have accompanied
Humáyún on his re-conquest of India. However this may have been,
he undoubtedly founded a military colony of Rinds at Satgupha, in
Montgomery, at which place his tomb still exists. Thence he was
expelled by Sher Shah, a fact which would explain his joining
Humáyún.
At this period the Baloch were in great force in the South-West
Punjab, probably as mercenaries of the Langáh dynasty of Multán,
but also as iudependent. freebooters. The Rinds advanced up the
Chenab, Rávi and Sutlej valleys; tbe Dodái and Hots op the Jhelum
and Indus. In 1519 Bábar found Dodáís at Bhera and Khushab and
he confirmed Sohráb Khan's three sons in their possession of the
country of Sindh. He also gave Ismail Khán, one of Sohráb's sons,
the ancient pargana of Ninduna in the Ghakhar country in exchange
for the lands of Shaikh Bayazid Sarwani which he was obliged to
surrender. But in 1524 the Arghúns overthrew Shah Mahmád Langáh
* The founders of the three Debras, which give its name to the Deraját. Dera Fath
Khán is now a mere village.
+ Shabzád was one of miraculous origin his mother having been overshadowed by some ·
mysterious power, and a mystical poem in Balochi on the origins of Multán is. ascribod to
him. Firishta says he first introduced the Shía croed into Multán, a curious statement.



45
Baloch organisation.
with his motley host of Baloch, Ját, Rind, Dodái and other tribes, and
the greatest confusion reigned.
The Arghúns however submitted to the Mughal emperors, and this
appears to have thrown the bulk of the Baloch into opposition to the
empire. Thay rarely entered the imperial service-a fact which is
possibly explained by their dislike to serve at a distance from their
homen--and under Akbar we read of occasional expeditions against
the Baloch. But the Lasháris apparently took service with the
Argbúns and aided them against Jaw Firoz-indeed legend represents
the Lashári as invading Guzerát and on return to Kachhi as obtaining
a grant of Gundava from the king.* The Jistkánis, a Lashári clan,
also established a privcipality at Mankera in the Sindh-Ságar Doab at
this time, but most of the Lashárís remained in Makrán or Kachhi.
Among the earliest to leave the barren hills of Balochistán were the
Chandias who settled in the Chándko or Chandúká tract along the Indus, t
in Upper Sind on the Punjab boruer. The Hots pressed northwa ds
and with the Dodáis settled at Dera Ismail Khán which they held for
200 years. Close to it the Kuláchis founded the town which still bears
their pame. Both Dera Ismail Khan and Kuláchi were eventually
conquered by Patháus, but the Kuláchis still inhabit the country round
the latter town. South of the Jistkánis of Mankern lay the Dodáís
of the once grent Mirráni clan which gaye Nawabs to Dera Ghazi
Khán till Nadir Shah's time. Further still afield the Mazáris settled
in Jhang and are still found at Chatta Bakhsha in that District. The
Riods with some Jatois and Koráis are numerons in Multán, Jbang,
Moutgomery, Shábpur and Muzaffargarh, and in the last-named
district the Gopángs and Gurmánis are encountered. All these are
descendants of the tribes which followed Mir Chákur and have become
assimilated to the Jatt tribes with whom in many cases they intermarry.
West of the Indus only has the Baloch retained his own language and
tribal organization.
In the Deraját and Sulaimáns the Baloch are grouped into tumans
which cannot be regarded as mere tribes. The tuman is in fact a
political confederacy, ruled by a tumandár, and comprising men of
one tribe, with affiliated elements from other tribes not necessarily
Buloch. The tumans which now exist as organisations are the Marri,
Bughti, Mazári, Dríshak, Tibbi Lund, Sori Lund, Legbári, Khosa,
Nuikári, Bozdár, Kasrani, Gurcbáni and Shambáni. Others, such as
the Buledhi, Hasani, Jakráni, Kabiri, are found in the Kuchhi territory
of Kalát and in Upper Siud, with representatives in Babáwalpur
territory
The Bozdár tuman is probably in part of Rind descent, but the
name means simply gontherd. They live in independent territory in
the Sulaimáns, almost entirely north-west of Dera Gházi Kháp
The Bughti or Zarkánı tuman is composed of several elements.
Mainly of Ripd origin it claims descent from Gyándár, a cousin of
Mír Chákur. The Ra heja, a clan with an apparently Indian name :
is said to have been founded by Raheja, a son of Gyándár. The Nothani
* The Maghassis, a branch of the Lasbaris, are still found in Kachh Gundára:
Chandias are also numerous in Muzaffargarh and Dera Ismail Khán.



The Baloch tumans.
clan holds the guardianship of Pir Sohri's shrine though they have
admitted Gurcháni to a share in that office, and before an expedition
each man passes under a yoke of guns or swords held by men of the
clan. They can also charm guns so that the ballets shall be harmle88,*
and claim for these services & share of all crops grown in the Bughti
country.
The Shambánis, who form a sub-tuman, but are sometimes classed
as an independent tuman, trace their descent to Rihán, a cousin of Mír
Chákur, and occupy the hill country adjacent to the Bughti and
Mazári tumans. The Buguti occupy the angle of the Sulaimán
Mountains between the Indus and Kachhi and have their head-quarters
at Syabáf (also called Dera Bíbrak or Bughti Dera).
The Buledhi or Burdi tuman derives its name from Boleda in
Makrán and was long the ruling race till ousted by the Gichki. It is
also found in the Burdiká tract on the Indus, in Upper Sindh and in
Kachhi.
The Dríshak tuman is said to be descended from one of Mir Chákur's
companions who was nicknamed Drisbak or 'strong,' because he held
up a roof that threatened to crush some Lashári women captives, but
it is possibly connected with Dízak in Makran. Its head-quarters are
at Asni in Dera Ghazi Khán.
The Gurcháni tuman is mainly Dodái by origin, but the Syáhphádh
Lurkáni are Rinds; ag are probably the Pitafi, Jegáni, and Cháng
clans-at least in part. The Jistkánis and Lasháris (except the Gabolt
and Bhand sections) are Lasbáris, while the Suhriáni and Holawáni
are Bulethis. The Gurcháni head-quarters are at Lalgarh near Harrand
in Dera Ghazi Khán.
Kasránit (80 pronounced, but sometimes written Qaisarádi as
descended from Qaisar) is a tuman of Rind descent and is the most
northerly of all the organised tumans, occupying part of the Sulaimans
and the adjacent plains in Deras Gházi Khán (and formerly, but not
now), Ismail Khán.
The Khosas form two great tumans, $ one pear Jacobábád in Upper
Sindh, the other with its head-quarters at Batil near Dera Gházi Khán.
They are said to be mainly of Hot descent, but in Dera Gházi Khán the
Isani clan is Khetrán by origin, and the small Jajela clan are probably
aborigines of the Jaj valley which they inbabit.
The Leghári tuman derives its origin from Kohphrosb, a Rind,
nicknamed logbár or dirty. But the tuman also includes a Chándia
clan and the Haddiáni and Kaloi, the sub-tuman of the mountains,
are said to be of Bozdár origin. Its head-quarters are at Choti in
Dera Gbázi Khán, but it is also found in Sindh.
* The following Baloch septs can stop bleeding by charms and touching the wounds, and
used also to bave the power of bewitching the arms of their enemies :- The Bajáni sept of
the Durkáni, the Jabráni sept of the Lashári, and the Giráni sept of tho Jaskáni ; among the
Gurchánis : the Shabmáni sept of the Hadiáni Legháris, and, among the Khosas, the
Chitar and Faqirs,
† A servile tribe, now of small importance, found mainly in Muzaffargarh.
The Qasránis practise divination from the shoulder. blades of shoep (an old Mughal
custom) and also tako auguries from the flight of birds.
$ The Khosas also form a sub-triman of the Rinds of Shorán and a clan of the Lunds of
Tibbi.



Baloch tribes.
The Lunds form two tumans, one of Sori, with its head-quarters at
Kot Kandiwála, the other at Tibbi, both in Dera Ghazi Khán. Both
claim descent from Ali, son of Riháu, Mír Chákúr's cousin. The Sori
Lunds include a Gurcháni clan and form a large tuman, living in the
plains, but the Tibbi Lunds are a small tuman to which are affiliated a
clan of Khosas and one of Rinds--the latter of impure descent.
The Marri tuman, notorious for its marauding habits which neces-
sitated an expedition against it only in 1880, is of composite origin.
The Ghazani section claims descent from Ghazan, son of Ali, son of
Jalál Khan and the Bijaránis from Bijar Phuzh* who revolted against
Mír Chákur. The latter probably includes some Pathán elements.
The Mazaránis are said to be Khetráns, and the Lobaránis of mixed
blood, while Jatt, Kalmati, Buledhi and Hasani elements have
doubtless been also absorbed.
The Mazáris are an organised clan of inportance, with head-quarters
at Rojhán in Dera Ghazi Khán. Its ruling sept, the Bálácháni, is said
to be Hot by descent, but the rest of the tribe are Rinds. The name
is derived apparently from mazâr, a tiger, like the Pathán 'Mzarai.'
The Kirds or Kurds, a powerful Brabúi tribe, also furnish a clan to *
the Mazáris. The Mazáris as a body (excluding the Baláchánis) aro.
designated Syáb-láf, or "Black-bellies.'
Other noteworthy tribes, not organized as tumans, are
The Ahmdánist of Máná in Dera Ghazi Khán, They claim descent
from Gyándár and were formerly of importance.
The Gish káuris, found scattered in Dera Ismail Khán, Muzaffargarh
and Mekrán, and claiming descent from one of Mir Chakur's Rind
companions, nick-named Gishkhaur. But the Gishkhaur is really &
torrent in the Boleda Valley, Mekrán, and possibly the clan is of
common descent with the Buledhi. I
Talpur or Talbur, a olan of the Legháris, is, by some, derived from
its eponym, a son of Bulo, and thus of Buledhi origin. Its principal
representatives are the Mírs of Khairpur in Sind, but a few Tálpurs are
still found in Dera Ghàzi Kban. Talbur literally means 'wood-cutter:
(fr. tál, branch, and buragh, to cut).
The Pitáfis, a clan found in considerable numbers in Dera Ismail
Khán and Muzaffargarh, Pitáfi would appear to mean 'Southern.'
The Nutkáni or Nodhakáni, a compact tribe, organized till quite
recently as a tuman, and found in Sangarh, Dera Gbázi Khán District.
The Mashori, an impure clan, now found mainly in Muzaffargarh.ll
The Mastoi, probably a servile tribe, found principally in Dera Gbázi
Kbán where it has no social status.
* The Phuzh are or were a clan of Rinds, once of great importance -- indeed the whole Rind
tribe is said to have once been called Phuzh. They are now only found at Kolánah in
Mokrán, in Kachhi and near the Bolan Pass.
#Large Ahmdáni clans are also found among the Lunds of Sori and the Haddiáni Legháris.
The Lashári sub-tuman of the Gurcháni also includes a Gishkhauri sept, and the Dombkis
have a clan of that name.
$ Also as a Gurchốni clan in Dera Ghối Khán.
The Bughtis hare a Masori clan.



Baloch tribes.
The Dashti, another servile tribe, now found soattered in small
numbers in Deras Ismail Khan and Ghazi Khán, in Muzaffargarh and
Babáwalpur.
The Gopáng, or more correctly Gopháng (fr. gophank, 'cowherd'),
also a servile tribe, now scattered over Knobhi, Dera Ismail Khán,
Multán and Muzaffargarh, especially the latter.
The Hot (Hút) once a very powerful tribe (still so in Mekrán) and
widely spread wherever Baloches are found, but most numerous in Dera
Ismail Khán, Muzafargarh, Jhang and Multán.
The Jatoi, not now an organized tribe, but found wherever Baloches
have spread, i.e., in all the Districts of the South-West Punjab and as
far as Jhung, Sháhpur and Lahore.
The Korái or Kaudái, not now an organized tuman, but found
wherever Buloches bave spread, especially in Dera Ismail Khao, Multán
and Muzaffargarh.
The history of the Baloch is an instructive illustration of the trans.
formations to which tribes or tribal confederacies are prone. The
earliest record of their organisation represents them as divided into 44
bolaks of which 4 were servile.
But as soon as history begins we find the Baloch nation split up
into 5 main divisions, Rind, Lashári, Hot, Korai (all of undoubted
Baloch descent) and Jatoi which tradicion would appear to represent
as descended from a Baloch woman (Jato) and her cousin (Murad).
Outside these groups are those formed or affiliated in Mekrán, auch
as the Buledhis, Ghazanis and Umaránis. Then comes the Dodái tribe,
frankly of non-Baloch descent in the male line. Lastly to all these nust
be added the servile tribes, Gopángs, Dashtis, Gholás and others. In
a fragment of an old ballad is a list of servile tribes, said to have been
gifted by Mir Chákúr to Bánarı, his sister, as her dower and set free
by her:
The Kirds, Gabols, Gadahis, Tálburs and the Marris of Kahan-all
were Chákur's slaves.'
Other versions add the Pachálo (now unknown) and 'the rotten-boned
Bozdárs. Other miscellaneous stocks have been fused with the
Baloch-such as Pathans, Khetráns, Jaţts.
Not one single tribe of all those specified above now forms a tuman
or even gives its name to a tuman. We still find the five main divisions
existing and numerous, but not one forms an organised tuman. All
five are more or less scattered or at least broken up among the various
tumans. The very name of bolak is forgotten-except by a clan of the
Rind Baloch near Síbí which is still styled the Ghulam (slave) bolak.
Among the Marris the clans are now called ţakur (cf. Sindhi takara,
mountain), the septs phalli, and the smaller sub-divisions phará.
The tuman (fr, Turkish túmán, 10,000) reminds us of the Mughal
hazára, or legion, and is a semi-political, semi-military confederacy.
Tribal nomenclature among the Baloch offers some points of interest,
As already mentioned the old main divisions each bore a significant
name. The more modern tribes have also, names which occasionally
look like descriptive nick-names or titles. Thus Lund (Pers.) mean



Baloch Custom.
49
knave, debauchee or wanderer, just as Rind does : Khosa (Sindhi) means
robber (and also fover'): Marri in Sindhi also chances to mean a plague
or epidemic. Some of the clan-names also have a doubtfully totemistic
meaning : e. g., Syáh-phádh, Black-feet : Gul-phádh, Flower-feet (a
Drishak clan) : Ganda-gwalagh, small red ant (a Durkaui clan)
Kalphur, au aromatic plaut, Glinus lotoides (a Bughti clan).
body but the fact give it 16 years consists
B troi, the pomen. Wat
BALOCB CUSTOMARY LAW IN DERA GÁzi KBÁN.*
Custom, not the Muhammadan Law prevails among the Baloch as
a body but the Nutkánís profess to follow the latter and to a large
extent do in fact give effect to its provisions. Baloch often postpone
a girl's betrothal till she is 16 years of age, and have a distinctive
observance called the hiski,t which consists in casting a red clotb over
the girl's head, either at her own house or at some place agreed upon
by the kingmen. Well-to-do people slaughter a sheep or goat for a
foast; the poorer Baloch simply distribute sweets to their guests.
B trothal is considered almost as binding as marriage, especially in
Rajanpur tahsil, and only impotence, leprosy or apostasy will justify
its breach. Baloch women are not given to anyone outside the race,
save to Sayyids, but a man inay marry any Muhammadan woman,
Baloch, Jaț or even Pathan, but not of course Savyid. The usual
practice is to marry withiu ihe sept, women being sold out of it if they
go astray. Only some sections of the Nutkánis admit an adult
woman's right to arrange her own marriage ; but such a marriage, if
effected without her guardian's consent, is considered 'black' by all
other Baloch. Public feeling deinands strong grounds for divorce,
and in the Jámpur tahsil it is not customary, while unchastity is
the only recognised ground in Rájanpur. Marriage is nearly always
according to the orthodox Muhammadan ritual, but a form called
tan-bakhshi ( giving of the person') is also recognised. It consists
in the woman's mere declaration that she has given herself to her
husband, and is virtually only used in the case of widows. The rule
of succession is equal division among the sons, except in the families
of the Mazári and Dríshak chiefs in which the eldest son gets a some-
what larger share than his brothers. Usually a grandson got no
share in the presence of a father's brother, but the custom now univer-
sally recognised is that grandsons get their deceased fathers' share,
but even now in Sangarh the right of representation is not fully
recognised, for among the Baloch of that tabsíl grandsons take per
capita, if there are no sons. As a rule a widow gets a life interest in her
husband's estate, but the Gurchánis in Jámpur refuse to allow a woman
to inherit under any circumstances. Daughters rarely succeed in the
presence of male descendants of the deceased's grandfather equally
remote, the Baloch of Rajanpur and Jámpur excluding the daughter
by her father's cousin and nearer agnatas; but in Sangarh tahsil
daughters get a share according to Muhammadan Law, provided they
* From Mr. A. H. Diack's Customary Law of the Dera Gházi Khán District, Vol. xvi of the
Punjab Customary Law Series.
f The niski is falling into disuse in the northernmost tahsil of Dera Gházi Khán and
among the Gopáng along the Indus in Jampur.
1 A few Nutkání sections in Sangarh still say that they only do so if it is formally bo.
queathed to thom by will.



Baloch customs.
do not make an unlawful marriage.* Where the daughter inherits
her right is not extinguished by her marriage, but the Baloch in
Rajanpur tahsil insiso that if married she shall have married within
her father's phalli, or if unmarried shall marry within it, as a coodi-
tion of b-r succession. The resident son-in-law acquires no special
rights, bat the daughter's son in Jainpur and Rájanpur succeeds where
his mother would succeed. No other Baloch appear to recognise bis
right. When brother succeeds brother the whole blood excludes the
half in Sangarb and Dera Gházi Khán tahsils, but io Jámpur and
Rájanpur all the brothers succeed equally. Similarly, in Sangarh, the
associated brothers take half and the others the remaining half.
Sisters never sacceed (except in those few sections of the Nutkánís of
Sangarh which follow Muhammadan law). A step-son has no rights
of succession, but may keep what his step father gives him during his
life-time, and, in Sangarh and Rájanpur, may get one-third of a natural
son's share by will. Adoption is not recognised, except possibly
ainong the Baloch of Sapgarh, and those of Rájanpur expressly forbid
it. But adoption in the strict Hindu sense is quite unknown, since a
buy can be adopred even if the adoptor has a son of his own, and
any one can adopt or be ad pred. In Sangarh, again, a widow may
adopt, but only with the consent of her husband's kinsmen. The
adopted son retains all his rights in his natural father's property, but
in Sangarh he does not sucreed his adoptive father if the latrer bave
a son bor, to bim after the adoption (a rule curiously inconsistent with
that which allows a man to adopt a second son). Except in Jámpur
tahsil, a mao may make a gift of the whole of his land to an heir to
the exclusion of the rest, and as a rule he may also gift to his daugh-
ter, her husband or son and to his sister and her children, but, the
Lunds and Legháris would limit the gift to a small part of the land.
Gifts to a non-relative are as a rule invalid, unless it be for religion, and
eyen then in Jámpur it shonld only be of purt of the estate. Death-bed
gifts are invalid ig Sangarh and Jámpur and only valid in the other
two tubsíls of Dera Gházi Khan to the extent allowed by Muhammadan
Law. Sons cannot entorce a partition, but in Sangarh their consent
is necessary to it; yet in that and the Dera Gházi Khán tahsils it is
averred that a father can make an unequal partition (and even exclude
a son from his share) to endure beyon't his life-time. But in Jámpur
and Rájanpur the sons are entitled to equal shares, the Mazári and
Dríshak chiefs excepted. The subsequent birth of a son necessitates
a fresh partition. Thus among the Baluch tribes we find no system
of tribal law, but & mass of varying local asuage. Primitive custom
is ordinarily enforced, and thongh the semi-sacred Nutkáuis in Sangarh
tahsil consider it incumbent upon them to follow Muhammadan Law,
even they to do not give practical effect to all its niceties.
Birth customs. The usual Muhammadan observances at birth are
in vogue, The bang is sounded into the child's ear by the mullah six
days after its birth and on the 6th night a sheep or cattlo are slaugh-
tered and the brotherhoud invited to a feast and dance. The child
But the Khosas and Kasránis in this tahsíl do not allow daughters to succeed at all,
unless their father bequeath them a share, and that sharo must not exceed the share admis.
sible under Muhammadan Law.



Baloch kinship.
51
vál and receive said. The Chilaines are called 82
is also named on this occasion. If a boy it is given its grandfather's
vame, if he be dead; or its father's name if he is dead: so too an uncle's
name is given if both father and grandfather be alive. Commen names
are Dádú, Bangul, Kambír, Thagia (fr, thagagh, to be long-lived),
Dríhan.
Circumcision (shade, tahor) is performed at the age of 1 or 2, by a
tahorokh or circumcisor who is a Dimb, not a mulláh or a Pirhain, ex-
cept in the plains where a Pirhain is employed. In the hills a Baloch
can act if no Domb be available. Ten or twelve men bring a rain
and slaughter it for a feast, to which the boy's father (who is called
the tahor wázha*) contributes bread, in the evening: next morning
he entertains the visitors and they depart. In the plains cattle are
slaughtered and the brotherhood invited; nendr being also given-
usage not in vogue in the hills.
Jhand, the first tonsure, is performed, pr'or to the circumcision, at
the shrine of Sakhi Sarwar, the weight of the child's hair in silver being
given to its mujáwars.
Divorce (called sáwan as well as tilák) is effected in the hills by
casting stones 7 times or thrice and dismissing the wife.
Concubinage is not unusual, and concubines are called suret, but
winzas are not known, it is said. The children by such women are
called suretwál and receive no share in their father's land, but only
maintenance during his life-tiine. These surets appear, however, to
hold a better position than the molid or slave women.
Terms of kinship. The kin generally are called shad or bráthari
(brotherhood), brahmdagh.
Pith-phiru, fore-fathers.
Father's sister,-Father, pith (X Mother, máth)-Father's brother,
phupht.
Son, bachh or phusagh
Daughter, jinkh triş
nashárt or dakhunt Son-in-law, samấth Cousin, i.e.,
(Daughter-in-law)
paternal uncle's child,
nákhozákht.
Grand-child chhuk-zákht
Brother,
Sister, grár or gohár X sirzákht, i.e., sister's husband.
bráth, biráll }
- Prop. -
Brother's wife, nashár. Sister's child, goharozákht
The mother's brother is máma as in Punjabi, but her sister is tri and
her son tri-zákht.
In addressing relatives other words are used, such as abba, father;
addá (fem.-i), brother (familiarly). A wife is usually zál, also ámrish.
A step-son is patrák, pazádagh or phizádagh (fr. phadha, behind,
thus corresponding to the Punjabi pichhlag). A step-daughter is
nafuskh.
nákho
SGI!
* Warha=Khwaja or master. The father is lord of the tahor or purification.'
It will be observed that nashár=son's or brother's wife.
Dakhún or dahún also appears to mean brother's wife.
Tri thus equals mother's sister or father's brother's wife.
Baráthar is a poetical form,
Dames' Monograph, p. 25,



52
Baloch mythology.
A namesake is amnám and a contemporary amsan. Equally simple
are the Baloch marriage customs. The youth gives shawls to his
betrothed's mother and her sisters, and supplies the girl herself
with clothes till the wedding... Before that occurs minstrels (doms)
are sent out to summon the guests, and when assembled they
make gifts of money or clothes to the bridegroom. Characteristically
the latter's hospitality takes the form of prizes a camel for the best
horse, money to the best shot and a turban to the best runner. The
actual wedding takes place in the evening. Nendr* or wedding gifts,
the neota or tambol of the Punjab, are only made in the plains, but
among the hill Baloch a poor inan goes the round of his section and
begs gifts, chieily made in cash. Similarly the tribal chiefs and
headmen used to levy benevolences, a cow from every hord, a sheep
from every flock, or a rupee from a man who owned no cattle, when
celebrating a wedding. It is also customary to knock the heads of the
pair together twice and a relation of them ties together the corners of
their chádars (shawls).
A corpse is buried at once, with no formalities, save that a
mulláh, if present, reads the janáza. Dry brushwood is heaped over
the grave.
Three or four days later the ásrokht or sehá takes place. This
appears to be a contribution also cal ed pathar or mhanna, each
neighbour and clansman of the deceased's seciion visiting his relations
to condole with them and making them a present of four annas each
In the evening the relations provide them with food and they depart.
On a chief's death the whole clan assembles to present gifts which
vary in amount from four annas to two rupees. Six months after-
wards the people all re-assemble at the grave, the brushwood is removed
and the grave marked out with white stones.
Of the pre-Islamic faith of the Baloch hardly a trace remains.
Possibly in Nodh-bandagh (lit. the cloud-binder), surnamed the Gold-
scatterer, who had vowed never to reject a request and never to touch
money with his hands, an echo of some old mythology survives,
but in Baloch legend he is the father of Gwaharám, Chákur's rival
for the hand of Gohar. Yet Chákur the Riod when defeated by the
Lasbáris is saved by their own chief Nodh-bandagh, and mounted on
his mare Phul ('Flower').
The Baloch is as simple in his religion as in all else and fanaticism is
foreign to his nature. Among the hill Baloch mullahs are rarely found
and the Muhammadan fasts and prayers used to be hardly known,
Orthodox observances are now more usual and the Qurán is held in
great respect. Faqirs alao are seldom met with and Sayyids are
* Also called mhannu, lit. contributions.'
+ See Douie, Bilochi.nóma, pp. 64-65. But Dames (The Baloch Race, p. 37) translates
dorokh by memorial canopy, apparently with good reason. Capt. Coldstream says : 'Asrokh
is a ceremony which takes place on a certain day after a death The friends of the deceased
assemble at his house and his heirs entertain them. and prayers are repeated. The cere.
mony of dastarbandi or tying a pairi on the head of the deceased's heir is then performed
by bis leading relative in presence of the guests. The date varies among the different
twmans. In Dera Gházi Khán it is generally the 3rd day after the death : in Balochistán
thore is appoarently no fixod day, but as a rule the period is longer.'



Baloch legends.
53
unknown.* The Baloch of the plains are however much more religious,
outwardly, and among them Sayyids possess considerable influence
over their murids.
The Bugtis especially affect Pir Sohri ("the red saint') a Pirozani of
the Nodhánit section. This pir was a gostherd who gave his only
goat to the Four Friouds of God and in return they miraculously filled
his fold with goats and gave him a staff wherewith if smitten the earth
would bring forth water. Most of the goats thus given were red
(i.e., brown), but some were white with red ears, Sohri was slain by
some Buledhis who drove off his goats, but he came to life again
and pursued them. Even though they cut off his head he demanded his
yoais which they restored to him. Sohri returned home headless and
before he died bade bis sons tie his body on a camel and make his tomb
wherever it rested. At four different places where there were kahír
trees it halted, and these trees are still there. Then it rested at the
spot where Sohri's tomb now is, and close by they buried his daughter
who had died that very day, but it moved itself in another direction.
Most Baloches offer a red goat at Sohri's tomb and it is slaughtered by
the attendants of the shrine, the flesh being distributed to all who are
present there.
Another curious legend is that of the prophet Dris (fr. Arab. Idris)
who by a faqir's sarcastic blessing obtained 40 sops at a birth. Of
these he exposed 39 in the wilderness and the legend describes how
they survived him, and so terrified the people that public opinion
compelled Drís to bring them back to his home. But the Angel of
Death bore them all away at one time. Drís, with his wife, then
migrates to a strange land but is falsely accused of slaying the king's
son. Mutilated and cast forth to die be is tended by a potter whose
slave he becomes. The king's daughter sees bim, blind and without
feet or hands, yet she falls in love with him and insists on marrying
him. Drís is then healed by Health, Fortune and Wisdom and
returning home finds his 40 soos still alive! At last like Enoch he
attains to the presence of God without dying. I
It must not however be imagined that the Baloch is superstitious.
His nervous, imaginative temperament makes him singularly credulous
as to the presence of sprites and hobgobling in desert place, but he
is on the whole singularly free from irrational beliefs. His Muhamma-
danism is not at alſ bigoted and is strongly tinged with Shiaism, its
mysticism appealing vividly to his imagination. “All the poets give
vivid descripsions of the Day of Judgment, the terrors of Hell and
the joys of Paradise, mentioning the classes of men who will receive
rewards or punishments. The greatest virtue is generosity, the crime
demanding most severe punishment is avarice," a law in entire accord
with the Baloch code. One of the most characteristic of Baloch
leyends is the Prophet's Maráj or Ascension, a quaintly beautiful
narrative in anthropomorphic formſ Some of the legends current
* There are a considerable number of Sayyids among the Bozdárs,
+ More correctly Nodhakáni, descendants of Nodhak, a diminutive of nodh, 'cloud.'a com.
mon proper namo among the Baloch. The word is corrupted to Nutkáni by outsiders
+ For the full version see The Baloch Race, pp. 169-176 where the legend of the Chihil.
Tan ziárat is also given. That shrine is held in special reverence by the Brahúis.
& It is given in Dames' Popular Poetry of the Baloches, pp. 157-161.



The Magassi Baloch.
concerning Ali would appear to be Buddbist in origin, e.g., that of The
Pigeon and the Hawk.*
Music is popular among the Baloch, but singing to the dambiro, &
four-stringed guitar, and the sarindá, a five-stringed instrument like
a banjo, is contined to the Dombs. The Baloch himself uses the nar,
a wooden pipe about 30 inches in length, bound round with strips of
raw gut. Upon this is played the hung, a kind of drouing accompani.
ment to the singing, the singer himself playing it with one corner of
his mouth. The effect is quaint but hardly pleasing, though Dames says
that the nar accompaniments are gracetul and melodious.
THE MAGASSI BALOCH,
The Magassi Baloch who are found in Multán, Muzaffargarh, Dera
Ghází, Mianwali and Jhang, t appear to be a peculiar people" rather
than a tribe. As both Sundis and Shías are found among them
they do not form & sect. Most of them in the above Districts are
murids or disciples of Mián Núr Ahmad, Abbássí, of Rájanpur in Dera
Ghází Kbán, whose grandfather Muhammad Arif's shrine is in
Mianwali. The Magassis in Balochistán are, however, all disciples of
Hazrat Ghaus Bahá-ud-Din of Multán. Like all the murids of the
Mián, his Magassi disciples abstain from smoking and from shaving
the beard. Magassis will espouse any Muhammadan girl, but never
give daughters in marriage outside the group, and strictly abstain
from any connection with a sweeper woman, even though she be a
convert to Islám. At a wedding all the Magassi who are murids of the
Mián assemble at the bride s bome a day before the procession and are
feasted by her parents. The guests offer prayers $ to God and the Mián
for the welfare of the married pair. This feast is called shadmanall and
24
26
* Ibid. p. 161.
+ The Baloch of Jhang merit soine notice. They are divided into the following septs :-
1' Rind-Madárí-Gádí. 11 Gúrmání.
21 Mírrání.
2 Rind. Laghárí.
12 Híndrání,
22 Mírúáná.
3 Rind.Chåndis,
13 Hot.
23 Nútkaní.
4 Rind. Kerní.
14 Jamali.
Parihár.
5 Rind-Gádhí.
15 Jískání
25 Patafí.
6 Bhand.
16 Jatoí.
Sábqí.
7 Almání.
1997 Laghárí.
27 Shalobí.
8. Gíshkauri
18 Líshorí.
28 Galkále.
9 Gooáng.
19 Lorí.
29 Kúrái.
10 Goráh.
20 Márath.
30 Mangesí, &c.
The Madárí-Gádí Rinds will not give brides to the Laghárí, Chándia, Kerní and Gáchí
Rind septs, from whom they receive them, but all these Baloch will take wives from other
Muhammadans except the Sayyids. The Mangesí only smoke with men of their own sept.
# In Balochistán the Magassi are said to form a tuman under Nawab Qaisar Khán,
Magassi, of Jhal Magassi. They say that in the time of Gházi Khán many of them migrated
into the present Sangarh tahsil of Dera Ghazi Khán, but were defeated by Lál Khan,
tumandár of the Qasránis and driven across the Indus, where they settled in Nawánkot, now
in Leiah tahsil. Their settlement is now a ruin, as they were dispersed in the time of the
Sikhs, but a headman of Nawánkot is still regarded as their sirdár or chief
§ in Multán these prayers are called ázi and are said to be offered when the feast is half
eaten.
ll In Leiah a shádınána is said to be observed on occasions of great joy or sorrow. All the
members and followers of the “Sarai' or Abbássi family assemble and first eat meat cooked
with salt only and bread containing sugar, the leavings being distributed among the poor
after prayers have been recited. Every care is taken to prevent a crow or a dog from
touching this food, and those who prepare it often keep the mouth covered up. A shådmána
is performed at the shrines of ancestors. It is a solemn rite 'and prayers are said in
common. A boy is not accepted as a disciple by the Pir until he is circumcised, and until
ho is so accepted he cannot take part in a shadmanu,



The Baloch criminal tribe.
55
precedes all the other rites and ceremonies. Contrary to Muhammadan
usage a Magassi bridegroom may consummate his marriage on the
very first night of the wedding procession and in the house of the
bride's father. At a funeral, whether of a male or female, the rela-
tives repeat the four takbirs, if they are Sunnis, but disciples of the
Mián recite the janáza of the Shías. Magassis, when they meet one
another, or any other murid of the Mián Sáhib, shake and kiss each
other's bands in token of their hearty love and union.
The Magassi in Leiah are Shías and like all Shías avoid eating the
hare. But the following customs appear to be peculiar to the Magassi
of this tahsil : When a child is born the water in a cup is stirred
with a knife, which is also touched with a bow smeared with horse-dung
and given to the child to drink. The sixth night after a male birth is
kept as a vigil by both men and women, the latter keeping apart and
singing sihrá songs, while among the men a mírási beats his drum.
This is called the chhati. Ou the 14th day the whole brotherhood is
invited to assern ble, women and all, and the boy is presented to them.
The doyen of the kinsmen is then asked to swing the child in his
cradle, and for this he is given a rupee or a torbun From 14 paos to
as many sers of gur and salt are then distributed among the kinsmen,
and the boy is taken to the nearest well, the man who works it being
given a dole of sugar and bread or flour. This is the rite usually
called ghari gharoli, and it ought to be observed on the 14th day,
but poor people keep it on the day after the chhati. The tradition is
that the chhatti and ghari gharali observances are kept because
Amir Hamza was borne by the fairies from Arabia to the Caucasus
when he was six days old, and so every Baloch boy is carefuly guarded
on the sixth night after his birth. Amír Hamza was, indeed, brought
back on the 14th day, and so on that day the observances are kept
after a boy's birth. For this reason too, it is said, the bow is strung !
All wedding rites take place at night, and on the wedding night a
couch and bedding supplied by the bridegroom are taken to the
bride's house by mirásis, who sing songs on the way, and get a rupee
as their fee. The members of the bridegroom's family accompany
them. This is called the sejband.
At a funeral five takbírs are recited if the mullah happens to be
a Shía, but if he is a Sunni only four are read. The nimáz in use
are those of the Shías.
called a dole of taken to the
THE BALOCH AS A CRIMINAL TRIBE.
The Balocb of Karnál and Ambála form a criminal community.
They say they were driven from their native land in the time of
Nadir Shah who adopted severe measures to check their criminal
tendencies, but they also say that they were once settled in the Qasúr
tract near Lahore and were thence expelled owing to their marauding
babits. They give a long genealogy of their descent from Abraham
and derive it more immediately from Rind, whose descendants, they
say, are followers of the Imam Shafi and eat unclean things like the
Awáns, Qalandars, Madáris and the vagrant Baloch who are known as



56
Balúch-Bangáli.
Habúras. Gullú they insert in their genealogy as the ancestor of the
Giloi Baloch. Speaking an argot of their own called Balochi Fárei,
they are skilful burglars and wander great distances, dieguised as
faqirs and butchers. When about to start on a plundering expedition
sardárs or chiefs are appointed as lenders, and on its termination they
divide the spoil, receiving a double portion for themselves. Widows
also receive their due share of the booty. The Giloi Baloch of Lyallpur,
however, claim descent from Sayyid “Giloi,” a nickname said to mean
“ freebooter.” This tribe was formerly settled in the Montgomery
District, but has been transplanted to two villages in Lyallpur and
is settling down to cultivation, though it still associates with criminals
in Ferozepur, Montgomery and Bahawalpur. It now makes little use
of its peculiar patois.
BALÚCH, BLÚch, a Pathán sept, see Blúcb.
BÁLO-PANTHÍ A small Bairagi sub-sect. Bálá Thappa* or Balá Sáhib was
a Bajrági sádhú of Ját birth who lived in the Daska tahsil of Siálkoç.
BALWATRAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
BAMBA, ar important tribe in Kashmir, and represented by two families in
Hazára : District Gazetteer, 1907, p. 34.
BÁM-MÁRGI, VÁMACHÁRI, the 'left-handed' worshippers of Káli and the
most notorious division of the Shaktiks. Said to have been founded by
the Jogi Kanípá, chiefly recruited from Saniásís and Jogís, and to be
found chiefly in Kárgra and Kasmír. As a rule their rites are
kept secret and they are perhaps in consequence reputed to be chiefly
indulgence in meat, spirits and promiscuity. The Choli-márg and
Birajpání are more disreputable groups or sub-sects of the Bam-
márgí.
BİMoza), an Afghán family, settled in Multán, which came from Khorásán
in the time of Abmad Sháb Abdálí: Multán Gazetteer, 1901-02,
pp. 161-2.
BANÁÍCH, a Dogar clau (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Bá-NAWÁ, ? a synonym for be-dawá, g.v.
BAŅB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BaŅd, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BANDAL, a Ját olan (agricultural) found in Moltán.
BANDECH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BANDEJAH, a Ját clao (agricultural) found in Multán.
BANDIÁL, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
BANGAKH, see BANGASH.
BANGÁLÍ, (1) a native of Bengal : (2) a vagrant tribe, probably akin to the
Sánsis (with whom they certainly intermarry) and found chiefly in
Kángļa, whither they were probably driven from Hoshiarpur by the
passing of the Criminal Tribes Act.
* This title suggests a Gurkha origin, as Thappa is a common title among the Gurkhas.



The Bangash.
57
The Bangálís are a small group, but are in constant communication
with the Sapehras and other criminal tribes of the plaine. Tbey live
by begging, exhibiting soakes, hunting and pilfering, but are probably
not addicted to serious crime. Their camps are said to contain never
less than 7 or more than 15 male adults. They make reed huts and
can strike camp on the shortest notice, travelling with donkeys as
pack-animals. Dogs are kept for hunting, and the Bangali will eat
any wild animal, even a byæua, but he eschews beef or pork according
to the prejudices of the people among whom he finds himself. There is
said to be a special Bangáli argot, known only to the tribe. Their women
are prostitutes, as well as dancers and singers. Besides propitiating
local deities the Bangálís are said to specially affect Sakhi Sarwar as
Lakhdátá' and ocoasionally visit bis shrine at Dharmkot near Nasírábád.
(3) The term Bangálí is applied to Kanjar in some districts and in
others to any Sapáda or snake-charwer in tho plains.* There is no
evidence that (2) or (3) have any connection with Bengal. In Panjabi
Bungálí means a braggart, as in bhukhkhá Bangáli, a boastfol persnn.
BANGASH, BANGAKH.T This is the name given to a number of Pathan
tribes, formerly estimated to amount to some 100,000 families, as well
as to the tract of mountainous country which they held. This tract
was once divided into Bálá (Upper) and Páin (Lower) Bangash and
was thence called the Bangashát (in the plural) or 'the two Bangash.'
The first historical mention of the Bangashát occurs in Babar's Tuzúk,
but the two tracts had long been under the control of the Turk and
Mughal rulers of the Ghazníwí empire as the most practicable routes from
Ghazní avd Kábal into India lay through them. At a period when
the Khataks and Orakzais are barely referred to, we find constant
mention of the Afgháns of Bangash. Roughly speaking, Upper
Bangash included Kurram and Lower Bangash the country round
Kohát, but it is difficult to define accurately the shifting boundaries of
the tumán as it was called by the Mughals. According to the Ain-i-
Akbari this tumán formed part of the sarkár and súbah (province) of
Kábul.
The Afghán tribes of Bangash were of Kuráni (Kaplárni) origin and
the following table gives their traditional desceut:-
KARLÁRNAI.
Kakái (second son).
Sulaimán.
Sharaf-ud-Din, (called Shitak or
the Afgháns).
Wazir.
Bai. Malik Kakhaí Mír.
The Bannúchis.
The Baizai, descendants of Bai, and the Malik-Míris or Míranzais,
sprung from Malik Mír, were the parent tribes of the Afgháns of Bangash,
and to these were affiliated the Kághzi, descended from Kakhai or
Kághai, daughter of Malik Mír, by a husband of an unknown tribe. The
Malik-Mírís, as Malik Mír's descendants in the male line, held the
chieftainship, but it subsequently passed to the Baizais. The latter
* Because of the belief that charming is most successfully prrctised at Daoca in Bengal,
There is or was a wild tribe in the rocks above Solon called P sogálís, Sapebra and Bapáda
are doubtful forms of Sapela, snake-charmor.
† The Eastern (or rather Northern) Afghán form.



Bngash history.
has several branches, the Mardo, Azú, Lodi and Sháhú khels. The
Míranzai khels are the Hassaazai, with the Badah, Khákhá and Umar
khely. A third branch, the Shamilzai,* apparently identical with the
Kághzi, produced the Laoļi, Hassan Khel, Músá Khel and Isá Khel.
Like the other Kaplárni tribes the Afghárs' of Bangash were
disciples of the Pir-i-Roshán, and their attachment to that heresy
brought about tbeir ruin, the Mughal government organizing
constant expeditions against them. After the Khataks had moved
towards the north-east from the Shuwál range in Wazíristán),t the
Baizai, Malik-Mírís and Kághzis then settled in the Upper Bangash,
invaded the Lower (Kohát) and, in alliance with the Khataks, drove
the Orakzai who then held the Lower Bangash westwards into Tíráh.
This movement continued till the reign of Akbar. I
The history of the Bangash tribes and the part they took
in the Mughal operations against the Roshánías are obscure. Probably
they were divided among themselves, but those of them who had
remained in Kurram appear to have adhered to the Roshánía doctrines.
After Aurangzeb's accession in 1659, we find Sher Muhammad Khán,
of Kohát, chief of the Malik-Mírís, in revolt against the Mughals. He
was captured, but subsequently released and became an adherent of the
Mughals. Khushhal Khan the Khatak gives a spirited account'of his
little wars with Sher Muhammad Khan which ended in his own defeat
and the final establishment of the Bangash in their present seats.
Among the Bangash Pathans of Kohát, betrothal (kwazda, asking')
is privately negotiated, the boy's father taking the initiative. Then a day
is fixed upon for the fatber and his friends to visit the girl's father. At
the latter's house prayers are read and sweets distributed, the nikah
being sometimes also read on this occasion. But as a rule the girl simply
puts on a gold or silver coin as the sign that she is betrothed. If the
wedding is to be celebrated at no distant date, the rarmária or bride-
price is paid at the betrothal-otherwise it is not paid till the wedding.
But a price is invariably expected, its amount varying from Rs. 100 to
1,000, and the boy's father also has to supply the funds for entertaining
the wedding party on he wedding day. The day following the
betrothal pitchers of milk are exchanged by the two parties and the
milk is drunk by their kinsfolk. The boy's father also sends the girl
a suit of clothes and some cooked food on each Id and the Shabrát.
On the day fixed for the commencement of the festivities sweets are
distributed by the boy's father among his friends and kinsmen and music
is played. Three days before the wedding comes the kenawal, when the
boy's kingwomen visit the bride and observe this rite, which consists in
stripping the bride of all her ornaments and shutting her up in a room
by berself. The next night the women visit her again for the kamsi
khlaswal or unplaiting of her hair. For this the barber's wife receives
& fee. On the third day the bridegroom gives a feast to all his friends
* Also interesting us baving given birth to the Bangash Nawabs of Farrukbábád.
+ The Miranzai give their name to the Miranzai tappa, Upper and Lower, wbich forms
tho Langu tahsil of Bobát,
Tbo Ain still includes the Orakzai in the Baogash tuman, but its raguely defined
boundaries may have been at that time deemed to include Tirák,
6 Some bundreds of thom were deported into Hindustao.



Bánhora-Bania.
59
and fellow-villagers, and in the afternoon he and his friends don
garlands. The neundra is also presented on this day. Then the boy
and his wedding party go to the bride's house, returning that same
night if it is not too far away, or else remaining there for the night.
On the fourth day in the morning churi is given to the wedding party
and coloured water sprinkled on them, some money being placed on the
dish used for the churi as the perquisite of the briile's barber. After a
meal the girls of the party, accompanied by the bridegroom's best man
(saubhalná), go to a spring or well to fetch water in which the bride
bathes. This is called ghari gharol, as it often is in the Punjab.
Then the pair are dressed in new clothes and the nikáh is solemnized.
Some parents give their daughter a dowry of clothes and ornaments,
called 'plarganai mál or paternal wealth. On the next day but one
after the wedding churi* is brought from the brid's house to the bride-
groom's-an observance called tirah. On the seventh day, uwamma wraj,
the bride is fetched to her house by her kingwomen, but three or four
days later she returns to her husband, sometimes with more presents of
clothes aod ornaments from her parents.
The Bangash of Kohát are tall and good looking, they shave the
head and clip the beard like the people of Peshawar. Though neat in
dress which is generally white, they have not much courage. The
Shiah Bangasht are much braver. In Upper Míranzai the Bangash
still affect the dark blue turban and shirt, with a grey sheet for a lungi,
which were once common to the whole tribe-as Elphinstone noted.
They shave the head and eradicate most of the hair on the chin and
cheeks, leaving little but the ends of the moustache and a Newgate
fringe. Young men often wear love locks and stick a rose in the
turban-when they feel themselves irresistible. The mullás have not
yet succeeded in preaching down the custom of clipping the beard.
The Míranzai women wear the ordinary blue shift with a loose trousers
of susi and a shirt, but the shift is often studded with silver coins
and ugly silk work. Few other ornaments are worn.
BANHOR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Bání, Bal, & female servant, a dái.
BanhThe word bániá is derived from the Sanskrit bánijya or trader :
and the Bániá by caste, as his name implies, lives for and by com.
merce dle holds a considerable area of land in the east of the Pro-
vince :. bat it is very rarely indeed that he follows any other than
mercantile pursuits. The commercial enterprise and intelligence of the
class is great, and the dealings of some of the great Bániá houses of
Dehli, Bíkáner, and Márwár are of the most extensive nature. But
the Bániá of the village, who represents the great mass of the caste,
is a poor creature, notwithstanding the title of Mahajan or “ great
folk," which is confined by usage to the caste to which he belongs.
* Wheat flour cooked with ghi and dry sugar.
+ Those of Samilzai dress in white with a coloured lungi and turban of a peculiar
pattern wover locally. In Upper Míranzai à peculiar tanio is worn-it is not very
jong and abont 13 inches below the collar is gathered into numerous please_which dia.
tingaishes them from paráchas or Muhammadan shop-keepers,



The Bánia organisation.
He spends his life in his shop, and the results are apparent in his in-
ferior physique and utter want of manliness. He is looked down upon
by the peasantry as a cowardly money-grubber; but at the same
time his social standing is from one point of view curiously higher
than theirs, for he is what they are not, à strict Hindu; he is generally
adritted to be of pure Vaisya descent, he wears the janeo or sacred
thread, his periods of purification are longer than theirs, he does not
practise widow-marriage, and he will not eat or drink at their hands ;
and religious ceremonial and the degrees of caste proper are so
interwoven with the social fabric that the resulting position of the Bániá
in the grades of rustic society is of a curiously mixed nature. The Bániá
is hardly used by the proverbial wisdom of the countryside : “ He
who has a Bániá for a friend is not in want of an enemy;" and,
“First beat a Bániá, then a thief." And indeed the Bániá has too
strong a hold over the husbandman for there to be much love lost
hetween them. Yet the money-lenders of the villages at least have
boon branded with a far worse name than they deserve. They
perform functions of the most cardinal importance in the village
economy, and it is surprising how much reasonableness and honesty
there is in their dealings with the people so long as they can keep
their business transactions out of a court of justice.
Organisation.—The organisation of the Bániás is exceedingly obscure.
They have certain territorial divisions, but there is also a true sub-
caste, called Bára-Saini* in Gurgaon, which is said to be qnite distinct
from the others. They are descended from Chamárs and at marriage
the boy wears a mukat or tiara of diák leaves, shaped like a basket, into
which a piece of leather is fixed.
The territorial groups are at least three in number. Of these the
chief is the Aggarwals, and there is a curious legend about their origin.
Báshak Nág had 17 daughters, who were married to the 17 sons of
Ugar Sain, but these snake daughters of Báshak used to leave their
homes by night to visit their parents, and in their absence their hus-
bands lived with their handmaidens, and descendants of these are the
Dasa or. Chhoti-garn gots of the Bániás, each got taking its name from
that of the handmaiden from whom it is descended. The children of
Básbak Nág's daughters formed the 17 gotst of the Aggarwal. Once
a boy and girl of the Goyal got were married by mistake and their
* From báró, 12, and reni, an army (Crooke's Tribes and Castes of the North-Western
· Provinces and Oudh I, p. 177.)
t Cf, Punjab Census Report, 1883, $ 533. The Aggarwal gots include :-
1. Jindal.
8. Mangal.
2. Mindal.
9. Tahil.
3. Gar.
10. Kanual.
4. Eran.
11. Bánsal.
5. Dh-ran.
12. Mahwar.
6. Mital.
13. Goyal or Goil.
7. Mansal.
Of these Kansal and Bándal are named from kans, a grasg, and bána, bamboo, and
they do not ćut or injure these plants. The Mahwar are said to be doscended from a son
of Agar Sain who married a low.caste wife, so other Bániás will not smoke with them,
Anothor account adds Sengal.
-
14. Gond.



The Bánia organisation.
61
descendants form the half-got called Gond,* so that there are 174 gots
in all. And again one of the sons of Ugar Sain married a low-caste
woman and his descendants aro the Mahwar got which cannot smoke
with otber Bániás. The Aggarwal Mahájans only avoid their own
section in marriage (Jind).
Tbe second group is the Saralia, who are an off-shoot of the
Aggarwal and appear to have the same gots.
The third group, the Oswál, appears to form a true sub-caste.t They
strenuously claim a Puuwár Rájput origin, but other Rájputs of
various tribes joined them. They followed one of their Brahmans in
becoming Jains, in Sambat 422.
Hence there are three territorial groups or sub-castes, and a fourth
of lower status based on descent:-
Sub-groups :-
Sub-caste I. Aggarwal i. Bisa
Tii. Dasa or Chhotia (o
ni } from & groha.) In West-
gradost " "
earn.
Şern Ráj-
Sub-caste II. Sarália, from Sarála.
putána.
Sub-caste III. Oswál, -- from Osianagrí-in Eastern Rájputána.
Sub-caste IV. Bára-Saini.
Apparently there are, besides these territorial groups, cross-divisions
of the caste based on religious differences. These seem to be Saraogi
or Jain, Maheshri or Shaiva, Aggarwal. Vishnoi or Vaishpavas.
Bat the Maheshri, who undoubtedly derive their name from Mabesh
or Shiva, are not now all Shaivas, for one of their number was in
consequence of a miracle converted to Jaivism. and so founded the
Tahtar got of the Oswál, among whom the Kamáwat got is also
Maheshri. It would appear that the Shaiva groups formed true sub-
castes, for the Maheshri certainly do not intermarry with the Aggarwal
or Oswals though Vaishnava and Jain aggarwals intermarry freely in
Gurgaon,
* Or Gand, cf. the Gaod or impure section of the Bhátias. Hissar Gazetter, 1892,
p. 137. In Jhelan the Goud and Billa sections do not intermarry, being said to be
descendants of a common ancestor.
| The original Oswal yots are said to be:
i. Thaker,
10. Bahádur, Panwar,
2. Baphna (Rájpat, by origin),
11. Kanbat ,
3. Sankbli,
12. Baid,
4. Kamawat Panwár (Maheshri),
13. Tagu Srishtri, Sanklá,
5. Mor Rakh Pokarna, Sapklá Panwar, 14. Burugotra, Bhatti,
6. Kuladhar, Bribat Punwárs,
15. Dádu
7. Sri Srim, Sanklá ,
16. Chorbheria, Raghubansi,
8. Srishtgota, Punwár,
17, Kanaojia, Rahtor,
9. Saohanti, Panwir,
18. Chuichat.
19. Kotari, or keepers of the treasure-house,
but the last does not seem to be a true got, so that there were only :8 gots, as there still
are among the Aggarwal.
The Brid are said to have been originally a branch of the Srishtgota and to have been
80 called beca 1180 Devi effected a miraculoas oure of the eyes of a girl belonging to that
section by causiog a special kind of ak to grow, the juice of which healed them.
[ To which place the Aggarwals make annual pilgrimages, as it is the ancient city of
Agar or Ugar Sain. They also have a boy's hair cut there for the first time.
$ An account from Jind divides the Bániae (like the Bhábras) into the Srimal and
Oswal groups, each with different gots :-
Srimal çots.
Oswal gots.
Chanália,
Bångaria.
Ranke.
Bambel.
Borá.
Júniwál.
Dugar,
Bambh.
Kanodia,
Tánk.
Gadia,
Náhar,



The Bánias in Bawal-Banjára.
But from the extreme south-east of the Panjab comes the following account which
differs widely from those given above. The Bawal nizámat borders on Rájpatána, and
formy part of Nábha, in wbiob Stato be Bániás are represented by four groups :-
(1) Aggarwal, (2) Rustagi, (3) Abaddelwál, () Mahúr, who rank in this order, each
group being able to take water from the one above it, but not vice versd.
(2). The Aggarwále of Bawal nizámat in Nábba perform all the ceremonies observed
by the Brab mans of that tract, but they have a special castom of boring the ears and
noses of children, both male and female. This is called parojan. For this ceremony
they keep some of the rice used at the lagan preceding a wedding in another family; and
carry the deotas, which are usually kept in the parohit's charge to their own house.
The deutas are worshipped for seven days. The pandit fixes a mahúrat or auspicious
time for the boring and the rite is tben porformed, a feast being given to Brahmans and
relatives. In the case of a boy, he is made to sit on a be-goat whioh is borrowed for the
occasion and alms are given, a present being also made to the boy. In Nábba town
some Aggarwal families perform this ceremony, but others do not.
(ii). The Rustagi* group is found only in the Bawal nizámat, in Gurgaon, Delhi,
Alwar, Bodaon, Bulandshahr and Gwalior. They are most strongly represented in
Báwal, at Pbora in Rewári tahsil and at Barand in Alwar State, but probably do not
exceed 1,000 families in the whole of India. Though in marriage they only avoid ove
got, yet owing to the paucity of the nombers the poorer members cannot get wives and
80 die unmarried. They say that Rohtásgarh was their original home and that their
name Rustagí is derived from Robtás. They bave 18 gots vamed after the villages which
they originally inhabited. They avoid widow re-marriage, but do not invariably wear
the raneo, as the Aggarwáls do. They perform the first hair-cutting of a boy at Nagar-
kot or Dahni in Alwar at the asthán of Devi. They observe the milni, je, wben the
parents of a betrothed couple meet the girl's father must give the boy's father from one
to twenty-one rupees, and the girl's fatber must not visit the village where his daughter
has been betrothed until afrer the marriage under the penalty of paying the milni,
but once paid it is not payable a second time. At the Dewali Rustagís pay special
reverence to their sati. Tbey are all Vaishnavas and also worsbip Gopí Náth. The
barát must arrive the day before the wedding, but they have no other special marriage
costoms,
(iii). The Khandelwals are few in nomber. They have 72 gots; the principal one in
Nábha Stato being the Bajolia. They claim to have come from Kbatu Khapdela in
Jaipar. The barát in this group also arrives the day before the wedding but the boy's
father has to feed the bará himself on tbat day. Like the Abírs the Khandelwals on
the widai day bava a Apocial custom. The women of the bride's family clotha the boy's
father is yellow clothes and put a pitoher of water on his head, with a necklace of
cameliy dung round his neck and compel bim to go and worship the well just as the
women do. He only escapes after much teasing by paying them from 11 to 51 ropees.
They do not wear the janeo, and as they are devotees of Bhagwán Dás, Mahátmá, of Tikha
in tbe Bawal Thána they do not smoke or sell tobacco,
(iv). The Mabúr are few in number in Báwal. They have two gots Mapal and Kargas,
They are Vaishnayas and specially reverence Hanumán.
BANJÁRA.- This and the Labána caste are generally said to be identical,t
being called Banjára in the eastern districts and Labána in the Punjab
proper. But Banjára, derived from banij, 'a trader', or perhaps from
banii & pedlar's pack,' is used in the west of the Punjab as a generic
tern for pedlar. Wanjára (q. v.) is doubtless only another form of
the name.
The Banjaray of the eastern districts are a well-marked class, of
whom a complete description will be foond in Elliott's Races of the
N.-W. P. I, pp. 52-56. They were the great travelling traders and
carriers of Central India, the Deccan and Rájpútána ; and under the
* According to an acconut from Patandi State the groups are Aggarwál, Rasangi,
Mabeeri, Barsogi and Kalal, and in Gurgaon it is said that the Saraogi and Vishnav (sic)
Bápiás do not intermarry though they can eat kachchi and pakki with each other,
+ In Southern India the Bridjára is also called Lawádab or Lumbápa (fr, lún, Sanskr
lavan, 'balt'). See also undor Multáni.



63
Banjára-Bannuchi.
Afghán and Mughal oinpires were the commissariat of the imperial
forces. A simile applied to a dying person is :
Banjára ban men phire liye lakriá háth;
Tánļa wáhá lad gaya, koi sangi nahin sáth.
“ The Banjára goes into the jungle with his stick in his hand.
He is ready for the journey, and there is nobody with him."
From Sir H, Elliott's description they seem to be a very composito
class, including sections of various origin. But the original Banjára caste
is said to have its habitat in the sub-montane tract from Gorak bipar to
Hardwár. The Banjáras of the United Provinces come anoually into
the Jumpa districts and Eastern States in the cold weather with letters
of credit on the local merchants, and buy up large numbers of cattle
wbich they take back again for sale as the summer approaches; and
these men and the Banjára carriers from Rájpútána are principally
Hindus. The Musalmán Banjáras are probably almost all pedlars.
The headmen of the Banjára parties are called náik (Sanskrit
náyaka, “chief”) and Banjáras in general are not uncommonly kpown
by that name. The Railways are fast destroying the carrving
trade of these people except in tbe mountain tracts. The word banjára
is apparently sometimes used for an oculist, and any Hindu pedlar is
so styled. Synonyms are bisátí or maniár in the central, and lanati
in the eastern districts, and, amongst Mubammadans, khoja and parácha.
In Amritsar their gots are said to include Manhás, Khokhar and
Bhatti septs, and they have a tradition that Akbar dismissed Chaudhri
Sháb Quli from his service whereupon he turned trader or banjára.
BANNÚHI.-— The hybrid branch of the Patháns which holds the central
portion of the Bannú tahsil, between the Kurram and Tochi rivers.
This tract they occupied towards the close of the, 14th century, aftor
being driven out of Shawál by the Wazírs and in turn driving the
Mangal and Hanni tribes back into Kohát and Kurram. The Bannáchis
have attracted to themselves Sayyids and other doctors of Islam in
great numbers, and have not hesitated to intermarry with these, with
the scattered representatives of the former inhabitants of their tract
who remained with them as famsáya, and with the families of the
various adventurers who have at different times settled amongst them ;
insomuch that “Bannúchi in its broadest sense now means alſ Muham.
madans, and by a stretch, even Hindus long domiciled within the limits
of the irrigated tract originally occupied by the tribe." The descenda
ants of Shítak, however, still preserve the memory of their separate
origin and distinguish themselves as Banoúchi proper. They are of
inferior physique, envious, secretive, cowardly, lying, great bigots,
inoffensive, and capital cultivators. Sir Herbert Edwardes says of
them : 'The Bannúchis are bad specimens of Afgháns; can worse bo
said of any race? They have all the vices of Patháns rankly luxuriant,
their virtues stunted. Their Isakhi clan, however, is famed for the
beauty of its women. 'Who marries not an Isakhi woman deserves an
ass for a bride.'
Sbítak, a Kakai Karlánri, by his wifo Bannú had two sons, Kiwi and
Súrání. The former had also two sons, Miri and Sami. To Míri's
sons fell the south, to Sami's the centre, and to Stráni's the north and



Banot-Barar.
west of Dand, the modern Bannu, which was named afte- Sbitak's wife.
When Bannu became a part of the kingdom of Kábul thọ Bannúchis
split into two factions, 'black' and 'white,' which left them a prey to
the Wazírs.
Banor, a sept of Hipdu Rajputs, which holds a bárah or group of 12 villages
near Garhshankar in Hoshiarpur. The Banot say they are of the same
origin as the Nárús, and the name is said to mean shadow of the
ban' or forests of the Siwáliks in which they once dwelt.
Bánsí, a class of musicians, players on the pipe (báns) at temples and
village shrines, but virtually employed in the same way as Halís or
Sipis, in Chamba.
BANWRA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Bányá-í, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Bányí, see Bányá.
BAORI, a tribe of Muhammadans, of Ját status, found in Montgomery.
BAPAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BAPHLÁ, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BAPPI, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán: see BORAN.
BAR, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BAB MOHMAND, see MOHMAND.
Babáí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BARAIYA, (Sanskrit, varájívi), an astrologer according to the Dharma Purán,
begotten by a Brahman on a Súdrá. But under the same name the
Tantrá describes a caste sprung from a gopa (cowherd) and a
Tantravaya (weaver) and employed io cultivating betel (Colebrooke,
Essays, 272-3).
BARAKZAI, a famous clan of the Abdáli or Durrápí Afgháns which sap-
planted the Sadozai family of that branch early in the 19th century.
Its most famous members were Fath Khan and Dost Muhammad his
brother. The latter took the title of amir after Shah Shujá's failure
to recover Qandahár in 1834 and founded the present ruling house of
Afghánistán: (for its history see M. Longworth Dames in The Ency-
clopædia of Islám, 1908).
BABAR, (1) a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán, and in Montgomery
in which District it is both Hindu and Muhammadani (2) a Hindu
and Muhammadan Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BABAR, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BARAR, fem. Barri, a low caste given to begging and roguery. In Jullundur
the Barars make winnowing fans (chhaj), baskets, and sieves (chhanra)
of reed. They also hunt with dogs. Their observances resepuble those of
the Chú bras. At a wedding one of the caste is selected to officiate, and
he kindles the fire and makes the couple go round it. The bride's
parents keep the wedding party one or three days, feeding its members
on rice, sugar and bread. On its departure the girl's father gives her



Barár-Baria.
65
& (marriage portion) dower. The women sing songs, and the
men chant a ballad called guga, The Barárs believe in Lal Beg and
every Rabi they offer him a rot of 2f sers with a fowl, boiled and
smothered in ghi. This is either given to faqirs or eaten by them.
selves. Some of the caste are vagrants and form a link between the
Sánsis and Chuhrás.
BABÁR, (1) The name of a caste of Játs around Bhatiņdá; Barár bans, a
person belonging to, or descended from, the Barár caste. See under
Sidhú Barár ; (2) & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BARÁRÁ, also called Baſaſ and Baráří, a basket-maker and bamboo-worker
in the higher hills who has also spread into the sub-montane tracts.
He is not & scavenger by profession though he is said to worship
Lál Beg, the Chúhțas' deity. See Koli and Nirgálú.
BARGHAȚ, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
BARBIÁL, a sept descended from Andeo Chand, son of Udai Chand.
fourteenth Rájá of Kahlúr. Another account wakes them descendants
of Rájá Ajít Chand's younger son.
Barnk. A wood-cutter or carpenter in the hills (root badhnú, to cut, cf.
Badhi). In Kullú the Barháís and Bádhís are the same, but not in
Kangra Proper. In Kullú they do not scruple to eat the flesh of dead
animals. The Basháís are not a separate caste, but Kolis or Dagis
that use the axe, and one of the Koli groups is returned as Barháí
There is also a Başháí tribe or clan among the Ráthis of Kángra.
BÁRHI. The synonym for Tarkhan in the Jumna Districts. The Barhi
considers himself superior to his western brother the Kháti, and wili
not marry with him : his married women wear the nose-ring. Cf.
Badhi and Baſháí.
Bári, a caste in Báwal who make patals and dúnas* of leaves, while some
are cooks to Hindu Rájputs. They are immigrants from Rájputána, and
claim Rajput origin to which their gor names point. These are Chauhan
(who are Asawariast by persuasion), and others.
In marriage they avoid four gots, and also fellow-worshippers of the
devi. Thus an Asawaria may not marry an Asawaria Chauhan. At
a wedding the pheras are not performed until the bride bas put on
ivory bangles-- like a Rájput bride. They affect Bhairon, eat flesh
and drink liquor, but Hindu Rájputs will eat food cooked by them and
though now regarded as Sudras they are admitied to temples.
BARIA, VARYA, & Rajput tribe, said in Jullondur to be Solar Ráinnte
descended from Rajá Karan of the Mahábhárat. Their ancestor
Mal (1) came from Jal Káhra in Patiala about 500 verre
ago. Those of Sialkot, where they are found in small numbers
and rank as Játs, not Rájputs, say they are of Lunar Rsiont
descent. The tribe is practically confined to Patiala and Nábha, and
the dame of the ancestor Mal, if common to the tribę, looks as if thev
were not Rájputs at all. Another form of the name appears to be
" Waráh. The Waráh are descendants of Waráh, whose grandson
aid in 10 admitied cookediron, o put one
* Patal. A plate made of leaves (also a screen, made of reeds), duna, a cup made of leaves,
Both are generally made from the leaves of the dhák tree.
+ Doroteas of Asáwaria Dovi, whose temple is at Sambbar in Jaipur,



Bartin-Barroald.
Rájó Banni Ped, is said to have founded Bhatinda, after conquering
Bhatner and marrying the daughter of its Rájá. Barni Pál's son
Udasí was defeated by a king of Delhi but received a jagir His son
Sundar had seven sons, of whom the eldest founded Badhar in Nábha.
(Cf. Barián).
BARIÁN, a tribe of Játs, claiming to be Lunar Rajputs. of the jaler, Sahi and
Lakhí families--through its eponym whose descendant Tok settled in
Sialkot. (cf. Baria).
BÁRIK (? Barakki), a clan of Patháns, claiming Arab descent. With the
Ansári Shaikhs they came from the Logar valley between Kabul
and Ghazni and settled at Jullundur. It includes the Guz,* Aliák and
Babakhel families and one branch of it is called Súdákhel. Elphin-
stonet describes the Barakkis as a class of Tájiks, mixed with the
Ghiljis (Gbilyais or possibly Khilchis). The Barakkis are also
described as a Tájik people, speaking a language of their own, and
Raverty notes that some Barákki Tajiks also dwell among the
Urmurs at Kánígaram in the Wazír country. For the connection
of the Bárik Patháns with Shaikh Darwesh see the article on the
Roshanías
BARIKKA, (s. m.). A low caste of Mubammadans.
BARKANDÁJ. (s. m.). Corrupted from the Arabic word Barqandáz. A police-
man; a constable : a village watchman.
BARKEZAI, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BARLÁS, Barlásyi, a MOQHAL clap (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BAROKZAL (1 Barak zai), a Pathan clan (agricultura)) found in Montgomery.
BarwLÁ. BATWAL. These two names, though probably of different origin,
are used almost a'e synonyms, the former beiog more common in the
lower hills and the latter in the mountain ranges of Kángra. But in
Chamba the Bat wala is clearly distinct from the Batwal, being a maker
of mats and windowing fans, and the name is probably derived from
bará or baria, the kind of grass ugod for them. Batwal or bátrar on the
other hand ineaps a tax collector, and batral is an ordinary peon of any
caste, even a Brahman, though of course he may be by casto a Batwal. I
At the capital, Chamba, Barwálás used to be employed as watchmon
and thus went up in the social scale as Batwáls In Kangra however
the Batwal form a true caste, while Barwálá is little more than
the name of an occupation Both words correspond very closely
with the Labbar or Balábar of the plains, and denote the village
watchman or messenger. In the higher hille this office is almost
* for the Ghazz Turks in Kurram 'see Raverty's translation of the Tabaqát-i-Nasiri,
+ Coubul, p. 315.
dionidee the Saints of Jalandhar in Temple's Legends of the Punjab.
DE J. Hutchison notes regarding the Batwáls of Chamba that they claim descent from
han Kaneri, a. deified ascetic of whom they know nothirg. Formerly employed a8 watch.
few are still enlisted in the State Police. Earwálás and Batwals are all Hindus and
their own gotras, but Brahmans do not officiate at their weddings, which are solomnisod
literate men of the caste. Their observances follow the usage of the locality in which
are settled. Thus in Chamba the biyah or full wedding rite is observed as among the
aastas though expense is curtailed and the ceremonies abridged. A Brahman fixos the
day of the wedding. The dead are burgt,
wei



Batwal customs.
67
copined to the Batwalds, while in the lower hills it is performed by
men of various low castes who are all included order the generic term
of Barwálá. These men are also the coolies of the hills, and in fact
occupy much the same position there as is held by the Chamárs in the
plains, save that they do not tan or work ia leather. In Kángra they
are also known as Kiráwak or Kirauk, a word which properly means a
man whose duty it is to assemble coolies and others for begár or forced
labour, and they are also called Satwag or "bearers of burdens.” Liko
most hill' monials they often cultivate land, and are employed as
ploughmen and field labourers by the Rájputs and allied races of the
hills who are too proud to cultivate with their own hands. They are
true village menials, and attend a.pon village guests, fill pipes, bear
torches, and carry the bridegroom's palangoin at weddings and the like,
and receive fixed fees for doing so. In the towns they appear to be
common servants. They are of the lowest or almost the lowest standing
as a caste, apparently hardly, if at all, above the Dumna or sweeper of
the hills ; but the Batwal has perhaps a slightly higher standing than
the Barwálá. Indeed the name of Barwálá is said to be a corruption of
baharwílá or "outsider," because, like aill outcasts, they live in the
outskirts of the village.
At Batwal weddings in Sialkot the learned among the Meghs officiate.
The Batwals have Brahman priests, but they do not conduct their
marriage rites : they also avoid contact with them. The Batwáls
marry their girls at an early age, but allow widow-remarriage, and that
too without regard to the husband's brother's claims. Two gots only are
avoided. Batwals* are medials.
Birth observances... Four or twelve inontas after the birth of a boy
ritari are observed as foliows:---Loaves of bread fried in oil are arranged
in piles, seven in each heap, and the head of each family takes a pile and
distributes it among its members. Only those who belong to the got in
which the birth has taken place can take part in this feast. Among tho
Jhanjotra the bead of a boy or girl is nat shaved till the child begins
to talk. Sometimes a bodi is retained, as long Hindus,
Their wedding ceremonies are thus described --
Four posts are fixed in the ground and four more placed over these.
On these four latter two turballs, supplied by the fathers or guardians of
the bride or bridegroom, are spread. Then the bride's father places
her hands in those of the bridegroom, saying: In God's paine I give
you this girl (my daaghter or relation).' Then the pair, the bride's
hands clasped in the bridegroom's, walk round an earthen pitcher
placed inside the four upright posts. This daly done, the marriage is
completed.+ On his way home the bridegroom has to wind some raw
cotton seven times round a shrab.
The Batwáls either burn or bury their dead. In either case on the
way to the ground they balt and place two balls of leavened barley
bread at the shoulders, and two at the feet, of the corpse. Thirteen
* The Batwals' folk etymology derives their name from betwal, son of a daughter' A
Rájá's daughter bocamo enceine by an illicit amour and was expelled her father's kingdom.
A Chuhrá took her to wife, but her child founded the Batwal caste,
At weddings food is thrown to the crow some which birds the Batwals are said to chiefly
worship and until they take the food tho Batwals themselves will not eat.



Baryár-Bashera.
Sindha
days after the death they take to a Brahman a rapoo and 4 sers of
wheat flour, and these he carries to a tank, where he recites prayers.
As amongst Hindas bhajjan* is performed after a death. Two yards
of cotton cloth, knotted at iho four corners, are hung over the left
shoulder, in token of mourning, by the kin.
The remains of a body are taken either to the Ganges or to Parmandal.
The Batwals are not allowed to sell ghi, and after a cow has calved
they do not eat ghà antil some has been offered to a Brahman.
In Sialkot the Barwalá gots are :-
Nandan
Dhaggá
Lakhatra
Sangotra
Jhanjotra
Laboria
Sargotra
Kaith
Molún or Molan
Each of the Batwál gots in Sialkot has its own templo, 6.9., the
Jhanjotra at Ghulhe in Zafarmál tahssl : the Kaith at Amranwall in
Sialkot: and the Molán at Gillanwálá in Zafarwal. The temple is simply a
mound of earth before which they prostrate themselves, each bead Of &
family sacrificing at it a goat in honour of his eldest son.
lo Kapurthala the Barwálá gots are:
Badiál
Dhadi
Phankráin
Chakmak
Jhajriha
Ratri
Chandgirain
Náhra
Soner
Chauhan
Pambália
With the Chandgirain got the other Batwals have no copnection, abd
do not even smoke with them. Like the Batwáls the Barwálás in Sial ROG
employ Meghs, who rank higher than the ordinary Meghs, as priests in
religious and ceremonial observances.
The Barwálás make baskets in Sialkot. In Kapárthala they are
village watchmen and messengers.
BarYÁR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BABYE, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Båsan, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar : Basan in Mont-
gomery.
BABÁTI, Basátiá, a pedlar ; a petty merchant.
BÁBhá, a synonym for Bhánd, 9. v. The term is applied to a jester or tumbler
kept by wealthy men, also to an actor (and so equivalent to Bahrapia,
especially in the Central Punjab). In Siálkot the Bábhá is said to be
a class of Pernas. The Básbás are usually Muhammadans, and though
probably mostly Mírásis by origin will not intermarry with them.
The term is also applied generally to any immoral person. Bábbás
are also coppers and toy-sellers.
BA-SBARA, 'regalar: a term applied to the four great regalar orders among
tbe Sanni Mabammadans, riz., the Cbishti, Qadiri, Saharwardí and
Naksh bandi, who all uphold Sufi-ism. Opposed to Bo-shara'.
BASHERA, a Kbarral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
* Worship.



Bashgáli-Bathmánú.
BABHQÁLI, a tribe of the Sikh-posh Kafirs : see under Káfir.
BABBKÁR, a group of non-Pathán tribes which used to occupy the Panjkora
Kobistán or Rohístán-i-Malízai in Dír, the upper part of this Kohístán
being known 84 Bashkár and the lower as Sheríngal, but the Bashkár
are now chiefly confined to the tract of that pame. The Basbkarí
language is said to be the same as the Garhwí.
According to Biddulph the Bashkárik, as he terms them, have three
clans; Múlanor, Kútchkor and Joghior. The Bashkárik name the
months thus :-
Hassan Husain
l Tlái Ishpo (third sister) Roz
Safar
Chot Ishpo (fourth sister) Lokgül (small festival)
Param Isbpo (first sister) Stopi (great month)
Miána (intervening)
Dowim Ishpo (second sister) | Shokadr
Gánytil (great festival)
See ander Torwál.
Basl. A tribe of Játs, whose forebear Tulla has a mat at Gopálpar in
Ludhiába. At the birth of a son, and also at the Diwali, earth is dag
there in his name.
Baská,'a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur : Basrás, a Ját clan (agri-
cultural) found in Amritsar.
BAT, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán. Also & sept of Kashmiri
Pandit, converted to Islám and found in the north-west submontane
Districts of the Punjab.
BATAHRA, (cf Patáhar), a stone-mason, a carver or dresser of stone, in the
Kángra hills. In Kullú he is said to be a Koli who has taken to
slate quarrying. In Chamba, however, they appear to form a true caste,
working gonerally as stone-masons, but sometimes as carpenters or even
cultivators. In Gurdaspur and Kángra the word is synonymous with
BÁJ.
BATAKZAí, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BATAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BAT, BÁTA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. Crowther gives the
following list of the Bát septs : Bat, Dhol, Jhandol, Pophart, Khaire,
Jhandher, Desi, Tatla, Anjla, Ghuman, Ghumán, Khak, Dhawal, Janua,*
Randher, Madri, Sadri, Hoti, Seti, and Kirbat, which may all intero
marry, so that a Bát sometimes may marry a Bát. All these septs are
said to be descendants of San-or Sainpál, who came from the Malwa 800
years ago. They first settled at Odhyara in Lahore. Khair(a)'s
descendants have two jatheras, Rajpál aod his grandson Sbábzáda,
who fell in a fight with the Kang Játs at Khadár Sáhib in Amritsar.
The Bath are also found as a Hindu and Mahammadan Ját clan in
Montgomery.
BATHEKE, à sept of the Wattú Rájputs, found in Montgomery and Bahawalpur.
BATHMÁNÓ, a Brahman al, of Bathmána village in Dhámí and one of the
chief tribes in that State. With the Jamogi Kanets it gives the
ráj-tilak to the Rána, and like them belongs to the Garg gotra. The
wazir of the State usually belongs to one of these two septs.
There is said to be a settlement of Januas (? Janjšas) beyond Peshawar who have
bocomo Muhammadans.



70
The Bauna tmbat system.
Bárí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multan.
BAFTAR, a Ját sept.
Batrí, a Hindu Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Bátria, BAWARIA. The following is Sir Denzil Ibbetson's account of the
Báuria groups :-"They are said to he divided into three sections : the
Bidáwati of Bikáner who trace their origin to Bidáwat in Jaipnr, do
not eat carrion, disdain petty theft but delight in crimes of violence,
will not steal cows or oxen, and affect a superiority over the rest;
the Jangali or Kálkamlia, also called Káldhaballia-fr. dhabla, a skirt,
the blanket, kamal, forming a petticoat, generally found in the
Japgaldes of the Sikh States, Ferozepore, and Sirsa, and whose women
wear black blankets; and the Káparia who are most numerous in the
neighbourhood of Dehli, and are notoriously a criminal tribe. The
three sections neither eat together nor intermarry. The Kalkamlia
is the only section which are still hunters by profession, the other
sections looking down upon that calling. The Káparia are for the
most part vagrant; while the Bidáwati live generally in fixed abodes."
This account is amplified in an interesting account of the tribe by
Mr. H. L. Williams of the Panjab Police. He gives the following
table of their tribal system which is clearly based on the usual
principle of territorial and other groups which cross-divide the natural
sections*:
* As regards the Báurias in Lyallpar Mr. J. M. Dunnett writes :
* There is a further and occupational division among the Báurias. Non-cultivators are
Káprix, Gumria, and Gadera, while Káldhablia, Doswalia, Dewawate and Labána are culti-
vators. The division, I think, really means that some live by hunting pure and simple; the
others combining agriculture with it. At any rate the difference in izzat is so great that
intermarriage between two divisions is unknown. Why Gadera, which must mean a shop
herd, is classed as non-agriculturist, while Labánas, he hunt pigs aro classed as caltivators
I do not know."



Groop.
Section.
Locality.
Oowapation.
0
1. Deswáli (territorial) or Gomaria 1. Solkhi.
(contemptuous, because they take 2. Makwána.
food from the hands of Muham- | 3. Panwár.
mudans)
Cultivators.
4. Dbándal, 9. Rahlaár.
5. Sankhla. 8. Sadwa.
6. Bbáti or Dábi, 9. Bargújar.
Chiefly found in
Hariána,
Bidáwati (territorial), Bigoti (a
corruption).
Cultivators,
1. Cboban.
2. Panwár.
3. Bhári.
4. Dhandal.
5. Manawat.
6, Sunáwat,
7. Rahtor.
8. Cháran,
9, Jalpáwat. | Chiefly found in
10. Dbol Pachwaia. Rájputána.
11. Parhiár.
3. Kaldhablia,* or Kálkamlia
... 1. Sohengre.
| 2. Dhándal.
3. Cbáran,
4. Chohan,
5. Panwár.
6. Sanawat.
7. Solkhi.
8, Bbát.
... | Breeders and herdsmon of goat
and sheep.
9. Ugáwat. | Feroze poro
10. Rabtor,
11. Sadáwat.
12. Nathota,
13. Dhol Pachwaia.
4. Nágauri, Bágri, (territorial) or 1. Choban.
Rábarla.
2, Papwár,
3. BÁti.
4. Solkbi.
5 Sankla.
6. Cháran.
7, Mapáwat.
8. Ugáwat.
9. Sadáwat.
The Báharwálás live in buts like
the Kápriwáls, and their womon
1 too are mendicants.
5
Dilliwal (territorial), or Bhátia ... 1. Sulkbi.
2, Bhati,
3. Chohan.
4. Dhándal
5. Vanawat.
6. Sunáwat,
7. Cháran,
8. Sadáwat.
9. Paranál.
10. Dhamdhara.
11. Dibás.
12. Panwar
Chiefy found in
districts on the
Jampa,
6. Gandbila
...
...
...
... 11. Játu. 4. Rahtaur.
7. Bagr.
Chiefly found in Makers and sellers of leather
12. Dáblia. 5. Chohan,
8. Pharra.
distriots on the thongs : also trappers.
3. Panwár. 6. Chanandia. 9. Banáwat. Jumna.
10. Dawáwat.
* This term is also applied to a sept of the Sapela (snake-charmer) Jogís.



Group.
Section.
Locality,
Oconpation.
7.
Paundla
...
...
...
... 11. Chohan.
..
2. Bargájar.
3. Paupar. .
Said to be good onltivators.
4. Bbáti.
5. Manawat.
6. Ragháwat.
7. Solkhi.
8. Chaptawat.
8. Kápris, or Kápriwál (allied to the 1. Jatá.
gánsi).
2. Rámáwat.
3.
4.
Birá.
Agotia.
5. Rabtaar.
8. Choban.
7. Galri.
Like the Kálkamlias. The Rape
riwále live in reed huto in the
jangle like Sápsis. Their
women are also mendicants.
9. Jikhar
...
...
...
... 1. Bargújar.
2. Choban.
3. Prowár.
4. Dbándal.
3. Parhiar.
10. Dhandoti
... | 1. Choban.
2. Panwár.
3. Bargájar.
4. Parmár.



Bouria beliefs.
73
Besides the derivation from báwar, a snare, which is the one usually
given, Mr. Williams records other traditions as to the origin of the
name · Bauria. According to one the ein peror Akbar demanded a
dolá from Sáudal, Rájá of Chitor, and on the latter's refusing, a battle
was fought, in which some of the warriors wera engaged near a búoli,
or well. Those on the Rajput side were cailed Báolias or Báwalias.
A third explanation is that, after the capture of Chitor, a young man of
one of the tribes which had taken to ihe jungles saw and loved a
Rajput naid of good lineage. They were married, but the young man
returned to jungle life and was called Baoli imbecile) by the bride's
relations for doing so, or on account of his uncoutu manner. Mr.
Williams' account coutinues :-
ir Tradition says that the Báwarias are descendants of Cháuda and
Jora, and when Fatta and Jaimul, Rájputs of the Sarajbans or Solar
race, were joint Rájás of Chitor, Shaháb-ud-dín of Gbor assailed the
fortress. It was defended by the Rájputs and their feudal military
classes, of whom the Bhils were the professional bowmen ; the Aheris,
the skilled swordsmen; and the Bawarias, the bandúkchis* or unusket-
eers. In this connection the Báwarias, although claiming Rajput
origio, do not profess to have been the equals of the Rájput ruling
class, but rather their vassals or feudatories.. Some few Bawarias
still wear the Rájput badge of metal kara, or ring, on the right ankle.
"Of the now outoaste tribes, whom the Báwarias recognize as having
shared with them the defence of Chitor, the Gádi Lohárs, or wandering
cutlers, are not only distinguished by the Rájput clan designations and
silver and metal karas, but openly proclaim that they are doomed to a
wandering existence till the Rájput power is again established in Chitor.
«The Bidáwati Báwarias and others, whose place of origin is said to be
Chhauni Bahadurán in Bíkáner, claim to be descendants of Rájá Rasála.
“ Religion.—The religion of the Báwarias is ancestor worship com-
bined with allegiance to certain deities who are common to them and
other outcaste or fool-feeding tribes." Mr. Williams then remarks that
several Bawaria clans alfect Gúga, many of heir members wearing
silver amúlets with his image in relief. It would appear that the cult
of Guiga is specially affected by the clans of Chauhán descent, as Gúga
was a Rájput of that tribe and is peculiarly the patron of all clans which
claim Chauhan origin. The Bhátis and other groups also affect Gúga, and
sich groups as worship him do not affect Devi. Mr. Williamas adds :-
« Rám Deo, supposed to have been an incarnation of Krishna, was
the son of Ajmal, a Rájput of Ranchhal. He is specially reverenced
by the Panwar sept and several of the wanderiny tribes. Similarly
Kálí, Laltá Masáni and other deities have devotees among the
Bawarias. Bat the criminal members of the tribe inake a sperial cult
of Narsingh and pay their devotions . him in the following manner:
When planning a criminal expedition, a chirágh filled with yhí is
ignited and a live coal placed beside it, ghi and halwi are added till
both are in fame ; on the smoke and fumes, called hom, arising, the
persons present fold their hands and make supplication, saying: He,
(the Rajput proclaim thout clan desic wander
I
:,: * Similarly the Máchhis or Jhiwars claim to have been artillerists in the Native Indian
Armion, and they also manufactured gunpowder, shot being made by the Lohárs,



YA
The Báarias in Gurgaon.
Nar Singh, through thy blessing we shall succeed. Remember to protect
ug.' The remains of the halwa are given to black dogs and crows.
Worship of the Sun also obtains in some septs. The cenotaph of
an ancestor named Jujhar at Jhanda, in Patiala, is visited for religious
purposes."
In Gurgaon and the tracts round that District the Báurias are divided
into numerous groups. Of these the most important, locally, is the
Jarúláwála or Latúria,* so called because its members wear long hair,
kike Sikhs. † This group is endogamous and includes 14 gots :
1 BADGUJAR.
10 Gangwálft
2 CHAUHAN.IS
11 Jaghotia.$$
3 PANWAR
12 Katoria. ||1|
4 R/THAUR.
13 Kotia,
5 Agotia. §
14 Mewátia.
6 Baghotia.it
15 Bhatti
7 Berará.
16 Parwar in Lahore.
8 Cháords
17 Sangra
9 Dábria.ft
18 Jugọnsa };
19 Konja je
These 14 gots are strictly exogamous. Widow re-marriage (karan) is
permissible, but not marriage outside the Jarúláwála group. Even
marriage with a Rajput woman, of a khanp from which the Bávrias
are sprung, is looked down upon, and the offspring are called súret-
wál, as among the Rájputs, or taknot. Such children find it difficult
to obtain mates and, if boys, can only do so by paying heavily for
their brides. Such men too are only allowed to smoke with pure Báurias
after the nari has been removed from the huqqa.
The addition to (or possibly overlapping) this grouping are a number
of occupational groups, as follows:-
1. Sehádariá, 14 skilled in entering (sic) the burrows of the seh
(porcupiue) and found in Bhawání, Hissat District.
* But ser ll! below.
+ The Bánrias do not appear to become true Sikhs but, probably because many of them
wear long hair, they are often said to be 80. Regarding the Báurias of Lyallpur Mr. J
M. Dunnett writes :-
"They ure, I find, all Hindús, out-castes of course, but still wearing the choti and
burning their dead. In one Police station in anticipation of registration (as members of
a Criminal Tribe) they had become Sikhs, but io do case had the pahul been taken before
orders for registration had been igsaed. One man thus naively explained tbat he had all
the kakkas except the kachh, and I had really come before he could get that made. In
their zeal they had even gone the length of wearing a sixth kakka, called kanpan, a small
spade, with which they said the patásha used in the pahul is stirred.”
I Sub-divided into 8 septs in Lahore, in which District they rank highesi.
Ś Of Panwár origin.
il ? Bighotia, from Bighoto, but they are said to be named from Baghot a village in Nábha
and to be descended from Játú Rájputs.
| Berará, so called from berar, a mixture of several kinds of grain ; the got is descended
from a Panwar who married a woman of his own got by kurewa.
** From Cháond, a village.
tt From dab, a grass found in the Jumna riverain lands whence they came; the got
claims Panwar or even Chauhan origin,
#1 From beyond the Ganges : cf Gangwália a group mentioned below,
$$ Of Badgújar origin.
Wil The Katorias claim Ráthaur extraction. But it is also said that the Báurias who live
in Punjab are called Jarúlávalá or Katoria and wear long hair, like Sikhs. The Báurias
of the U ted Provinces are styled Bidkiaş,
9 Or Sehodhariá,



The Báurias in Gurgaon.
75
2. Telbechá, dealers in the oil of the pelican and other birds,
and found east of the Ganges. These have an off-shoot in the
3. Bailia, a group which modestly claims Jhiwar-Kahár origin, and
is distinguisbed by churis (or an iron bangle) worn on the wrist.
4. Ugarwa, an off-shoot of the Bágļís who live by burglarg.
5. Bhaurjalia (sic) who cse the baur (báwar) or snare.
6. Badhak or Badhakia, hunters, found in Bharatpur State,
Mathra, etc.
7. Chirimárs, bird-sparers, found in the same tracts.
Other groups are territorial, such as the-
1. Dilwális, found in Delhi and its neighbourhood. An off-shoot
of this group is the Náříwál which sells ropes.
2. Nágauria, from Nágaur in Jodhpur State.
3. Bágri, from the Bágar of Bíkáner.
4. Marús, from Márwár.
Other groups of less obvions origin are also found. Such are them
1. Káldhablia or Kaldhablia, who wear the black woollen cloak
(kamlí) and are found in the Patiala State and to the west of
Bhiwání.
2. Gangwália,* found in Jaipur State.
3. Hábúrá, vagrants from the east of the Jumna.
4. Gandhíla, found on any riverain in the Punjab (? proper) and
also east of the Jumna.
5. Ahiria, fonnd in and about Hodal and Palwal. According to a
Brahman parohit of the Ahirias at Hodal the Baurias and Ahirias
are descended from Goha, a Bhil, one of whose descendants married
a Thakur.t Her children by him became Abirias (Heria or Heri,
lit. a hunter), while the Báurias are of pure Bhil blood. Closely
allied to the Ahiria are the Badhaks. The Ahiria and Báuria do
not intermarry.
The panch, who are chosen from the four khánps and the Mewatia
group, are regarded as leaders of the tribe. They form a parchávat
Tor?'a panchayat for each khánp) for the whole group. Offences
are tried before the panchayat which administers to the offender
an path on the Ganges or the Jumva : or he is made to advance
five paces towards the sun and invoke its curse if he is guilty : but
the most binding oath is that taken while plucking the leaf of
a pipal tree. Fines go towards the expenses of the, panchayat, and
any surplus to the panch. Pancháyats also solemnize the marriages of
widows and the fee then realised is paid to the widow's father-in-law.
The Báuria sehrhs.
Tradition avers that when a ráni of Nimrána married she was
accompanied by five families of Ráthair Báurins from whom are
descended the present Ráthaur (? Búurias or) Rájputs. Hence the
* Not, apparently, the same as the Gangál got mentioned above.
† Apparently named Karaul, and founder of the State of Karaulí.



76
The Báuria culte.
Ráthaurs * regard Nimrána as tbeir Sehrh and worship Deví at ber
temple there. The Panwars have their sehrh at Kaliána near
Nárnaul: the Badgújars theirs at Kanaund: and the Chaubáns at
Ranmoth near Mandrau (?) in Alwar.
The Dabrias specially affect Masání Deví,t but the Báurius as a
whole have no distinctive cults and few special observances. Some
of them wear the hair long in honour of Masání Deví, to whom a
childless inan vows that if a child be vouchsafed to him its hair
shall remain uncut. Some Báurias also wear the patri, an ornament
slaped like a jugni and made of gold ; in case of sickness prayer is
offered through (sic) the patri to the pitars, ancestors,' and on
recovery the sufferer has a patri made and wears it round his neck.
At meal times it is touched and a loaf given in alms in the pitars'
names. I Another charm is the deví ků dánú, a few grains of corn,
which are carried on the person and which, like the patri, avert all
evil.
The Deví at Nagarkot, Záhir Pir (Gúga) and Thakurji (? Krishna)
are other favourite deities of the Báurias, but the Sun god is also
propitiated in times of calamity or sickness. Fasts (bart) are kept
on Sunday in honour of the Sun, and water thrown towards it. The
janeo is never worn. For some reason not explained an oath on a
dopkey is peculiarly binding. Mr. Williams notes that Báurias are said
not to ride the donkey and to regard it with peculiar aversion. Oaths
are also taken on the cow and the pipal tree.
The Búurias are strict Hindús, refusing to eat anything, even
ghi, which has been touched by a Mubammadan, though they will drink
water from a bhishti's skin, but not that kept in his house. Báurias
will only eat meat procured by themselves or killed by jhatka. Pork:
they eschew, but not the flesh of the wild pig. The nilgai is regarded
as a cow and never eaten, nor is the flesh of a he-buffalo save by
the Báurias of Shaikhawatí in Jaipur. As they are no longer per.
mitted to possess swords they slaughter goats with the chhuri.
In Lahore, where the Báurias are said to be non-criminal, they have
a dialect of their own called Ladí, Elsewhere their patois is called
Lodi and is said to be understood by Bhíls, Sánsis, Kanjars and such
like tribes. The Báwariah dialect is called Ghirhar, and sometimes
Pashtu,
* And the Katorias, as being of Ráthaur descent.
+ Mr. Williams says :-'Goats are offered to Devi and, at the time of oblation, water is
sprinkled on the animal's head; if it shakes its ears the omen is, propitious and Deví has
accepted the sacrifice.' And Mr. Dunnett writes :-"In Lyallpur the worship of a deví is
admitted by all but the songira Dharmwat who revere Bhairkiya and Narswer (Nar Singh). :
The devi is worshipped in jungles at the sacred tree. At its roots a square is marked
out with stones, and in the centre a hole is dug. A he-goat is then slain, and the blood
poured into the hole, the holy tree and the foreheads of the worshippers being also sprin-
Kled. Over the hole a hearth is then constructed, on which the skull, the left fore-leg,
Jiver, kidneys and fat are burned. The remainder is then cooked on the same hearth, and
eaten by the worshippers. The ceremonial is of course based on the idea that the god is
of the brotherhood of the tribe."
I When anyone is in trouble, the cause is ascribed to his having angered a departed
spirit, called patar, lo appease which some crumbs are fried in oil and put in a braziar.
Lefore which all those present fold their hands and beat their brows. (Williams).
& In some parts the Báurias will, it is said, eat the flesh of animals which have died a
natural death,



Bauria customs.
77
Birth observances. The child's name is chosen by a Brahman. On
the difth day after hirth the mother takes a lota full of water on her head
to the nearest well, a Brahmani and Nain, with other women, accompany.
ing her and singing songs. She inkes with her bhanjor (moistened grain)
of gram or bájra and after worshipping the well throws some of the
bhanjor, with a little water out of her lota and a makka brought by
the Brabmani or Nain into the well. The rest of the bhanjor is
distributed among children. The inother is deemed purified on the
tenth day. Ráthaur children are taken to the sehrh at Nimráda to
have their heads shaved, but the Panwárs, Chaubáns and Badgújars
all take theirs to Masáni Deví at Gurgaon.
Wedding rites.-Betrothal is not specially initiated by either side,
but as soon as the negotiations have reached a certain stage the
girl's father, his Brahman or nai goes with the tika and even the
poorest man confirms the agreement by presepting a rupee to the boy.
Well-to-do people give him a camel or gold earrings.
Báuria men are, in their youth, sometimes branded. Most of their
women are tattooed in one or more places on the face, viz., near the
outer corners of the eyes, at the inner corner of the left eye, on the left
cheek and on the chin : hence Báoria women are easily recognizable.
Báurias do not marry within their own got, and it is said that the
bridegroom must not be younger than the bride, and that a blind or
one-eye'd man must espouse a blind or one-eye'd woman! In some
tribes, adds Mr. Williams, fair women are only married to fair men,
and the blackskinned, which form the majority, wáte with one another.
The girl's father intimates the date fixed for her wedding by
sending a súha chitthi written in Sanskrit, and on the day fixed the
wedding party goes to the girl's house. The bridegroom wears the
sehru and his forehead is smeared with haldi. The eremonies are
all in essence the same as those observed by the Rájputs,. except that
no khera is named, for the simple reason that the Báurias have no
fixed abodes. Weddings are, however, pot solemnised by sending the
patka or katár in lieu of the bridegroom. Báuria brides wear a necklace
made of horse hair on which are threaded gold and silver beads. This
is called sohag sútra and it is worn till the husband's death, when it
is burnt with his corpse.
On a man's death his elder and then his younger brother have the
first claim to his widow's hand. Failing such near kinsmen a stranger
mạy espouse her on payment of pichha, a sum assessed by the
panches and paid by the new husband to the nearest agbate of the
deceased's father.
Co-habitation with a woman of another caste is punished by not
allowing the offender to smoke with the brotherhood, and the woman is
regarded as a suret and her children as: suretwál even though she
be a pure Rájput by vaste. Infidelity on å wife's part is purged away
by pressing a red hot iron into her tongue.*
* Mr. Williams' account of the Bawaria marriage customs is however different and runs
as follows:
"Each tribal sub-division is endogamous, and each got exogamous to the father's got
Marriage is permitted in the mother's got excluding near relations Marriage within th*



78:
Báuria sport.
The observances at death differ in no way from those current
among orthodox Hindus. The bones of the dead are taken to Garh
Muketsar and there thrown into the Ganges. Mr. Williams however
writes :-"The dead over seven years of age are burnt among most of
the tribes, though some, as the Bidáwati, practise burial. The corpse
of a young person is draped with fine white cloth, of an old man with
coarse clotb, and of a woman with turkey red. On the third day after
a funeral, boiled rice is distributed among young girls. When a
Bawaria wife is cremated her widower lights the pile. A father per-
forms the same office for a son, à son for a father, on failing such
relationship, any near relative. On the third day following, the ashes
are collected and rice is laid on seven pípal leaves and placed at the foot
of the tree, certain persons being told to watch from à distance. If a
crow eats the rice, it is a good omen; but bad if a dog devours it. The
period of mounrnig lasts twelve days. The ceremony of shradh is per-
formed in Assu, when rice is given to crows, the idea being to supply
the necessities of the deceased in another world."
Sporting Propensities.--A distinguishing feature of this people is
their shikarring proclivities. In all parts of the Province they have
dogs, large meshed nets for catching jackals and other vermin, and
thong nooses for antelope. Where jungle is thick and game plentiful,
sport sometimes takes the form of slaughter. Game is gradually
driven into an enclosure formed by two lines of stakes, several feet
apart, each tipped with a coloured rag and forming an angle at the
apex of which are planted in several parallel rows the little bamboo
stakes with slip knot thongs, looking in the distance like a patch of dry
grass. The third side of the triangle is formed by the Bawarias with
dog and tom toms. When the beat begins, the line of beaters advances
prohibited degrees of consanguinity is punished with excommunication up to a period of 12
years, as among the Kuchband and other cognate tribes. The higher gots in the social scale
are the solkhi, or Sulankhi, Panwar, Chohan, Bháti, and Sankhla, and hence intermarriage
with them is sought after for the sake of their blue blood.
Marriage and betrothal occur when both sexes have arrived at adult age. Sons may
remain unmarried without incurring odium ; but, in the case of daughters, the pancháyat
interferes and penalties are inflicted if too much time is allowed to pass.
The ceremonies at betrothal-sák or mangani--are simple. An emissary of the suitor
meets, by appointment, the girl's relatives and hands a sum ranging from Rs. 5 to 9 to the
senior male relative present, who pays the amount to the girl's father. The suitor is then
invited, if acceptable, to the evening meal, when the contract is made. An interval then
passes before the date of mariage is fixed, previous to which the girl's paternal uncle visits
The suitor and gives him a rupee. Seven days before the wedding, the same relative
presents himself and ties black cotton tags round the youth's ankles.
Marriage is always by phera, as among tribes of the same category. On the day ap.
pointed, four wooden pegs, a span long, are drịven into the ground forming a square, a fire
lit in the centre and cotton seed steeped in oil placed over it. A square copper coin (mansuri
raina), is put on the top of each peg. The couple circle seven times round the fire with a
knot tied in their garments, and the ceremony ends. A Brahman is usually present and
receives a donation of Rs. 2 to 5, Rs. 24 to 100, according to the status of the parties, is
paid to the bride's parents, who prepare an outfit of cooking utensils and clothing, and
return some of the rupees in a tháli, or brass vessel. The home-coming, or mukláwa
ceremony comes last and consists in the bride's being sent to her husband's house with a
gift of a chadar from her parents.
Marriage by karewa is permitted and is the only form permissible to widows. It is
availed of when a woman is destitute, or has no parents. A surviving brother is required
to marry the widow, and, in default, she may claim compensation through a panchayat,
When a widow marries, bracelets of lacquer are put on her and a fine of Rs. 5 imposed. A
woman convicted of adultery is disgraced and her chadar torn, the male accomplice being
fined from Rs. 2 to 4 by the panchayat."



Báwá-Beldár.
79
play: The Bazágrar both sexes poumbler and
with great noise and howling, caasing the game to gallop away until the
line of stakes is reached, when scared by the coloured rags the animals
glance aside and speed towards the apex, where a clear space appears
with no visible obstacle but some tufts of familiar grass. In attempting
to clear these, some antelope are caught in the thongs and thrown
violently to the ground, when their throats are cut
Báwá, fem. Báwí (1), a title given to the male descendants of the first three
Gurús of the Sikhs ; (2) a fakir or sádhí; the head of an order of
monks.
Bawár, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BawRE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
BAZáz, (1) a cloth-dealer; (2) a section of the Aroras.
BAZID KHEL, a section of the Jawaki Afrídis found in Baizai, Kohát.
Bázícar, fr. Pers. bázi, play.' The Bázígar is usually a Muhammadan,
the Naţ a Hindu. Among the Bázígar both sexes perform, but
among Naţs only the males. Some say the Bázígar is a tumbler and
the Nat a rope-dancer, others that the former is a juggler and also an
acrobat, the latter an acrobat only. In the Eastern Punjab the
Bázígar is termed Bádi. See Nat.
In Ferozepur the Bázígars bave a shrine at Sadhaiwala, built in
honour of an old woman who died not many years ago. Liquor is
poured into a cup-shaped hole in this tomb and drunk. Weddings
in families which affect this shrine are generally solemnised there.
They have a Rájá, and his wife is Ráni. Both settle disputes without
appeal and are almost worshipped, the latter being attended by a
number of women wbo carry her long train, Bázígar camps consist
of reed huts pitchea in regular lines. The caste' is said to be
recruited from various castes, even Brahmans and Játs, but each
sub-division is endogamous. The Bázígars are in fact only an occupation-
al group.
Bed* a section of the Muhiáls.
BEDA,+ (1) a musician caste in Ladákh : see Ind. Art. 1901, p. 330 ; (2) the
caşte which supplies the potential victim who rides on the rope at
the Bihunda sacrifices in the Upper Sutlej valley : see North Indian
Notes and Queries, IV, § 144.
Bedí, fem. Bedan 1.9., vedi), a section of the Khatrí caste to which Gurú
Nának, the founder of Sikhism, belonged. It is divided into two sub-
sections, which interwarry.
BEGEKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery. Bake a sept
of the Joiyas in Baháwalpur.
BELDÁR, fr. bel, mattock. One who works in mortar, etc., with a hoe or a
spade, a labourer whose work is to dig or delve. In the Western
Punjab the term is applied to the Od, 9. v.
* The Sanskrit ambashthú or vaidyá "vulg. baidya, bed), a professor of medicine : begotten
by a Brahman on a Vaisy a woman. (Colebrooke's Essays, p. 272).
+ In Traill's Statistical Account of Kumaon (reprinted from Asiatick Researches, Vol. XVI
in 'Official Reports on the Province of Kumaon, 1878) at p. 51 an account is given of the
vropitiatory festivals held in villages dedicated to Mabadeva. At these bad is or rope.
dancors are engaged to perform on the tight-rope or slide down an inclined rope stretched
from the summit of a cliff to the valley beneath. The badis do not appear to be a caste



80
Benach-Bhábra.
BENACH, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BE-NAWA (? Bá-nawá) (1) a doubtful syn. for ba-shara : (2)-or Bá-nawá,*
according to Mr. Maclagan one of the most prominent of the
Be-shará or uporthodox orders of Islám, and said to be followers of one
Khwaja Hasan Basrí. The term is sometimes apparently applied in
a loose manner to Qádiri and Chishtí faqirs, but it is properly applicable
ouly to a very inferior set of beggars-men'who wear patched garments
and live apart. They will beg for anything except food, and in
begging they will use the strongest language; and the stronger the
language, the more pleased are the persons from whom they beg. Many
of the offensive names borne by villages in the Gujranwala District
are attributed to mendicants of this order, who have been denied
an alms. The proper course is to meet a Bo-nawa beggar with gibes
and put him on his mettle ; for he prides himself on his power of
repartee, and every Be-pawá wears a thong of leather which he has to
unloose when beaten in reply, and it is a source of great shame for him
to unloose this thong (tasma khol dená). The Be-nawás appear to be rare
in the west of the Punjab, and those in our returns are mainly from
Karnál, Jullundur, Ludhiana and Hoshiarpur.
BERAG, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BE-SHARÁ, a term applied to the irregular or unorthodox orders of Islam
whose followers, while calling themselves Musalmáns, do not acoom-
modate their lives to the principles of any religious creed : cf. ázád.
The Be-shará orders include the Be-nawá, Gurzmár, Madári and Rasul-
sháhis.
BE8K0, s.m. (K.), the watchman of harvested grain.
Beta (incorrectly BATIA), a small outcaste group found in Spiti, correspond.
ing to the Hesis of Kullú. They live by begging, making whips for
the men and bracelets of shell for the women, and attending weddings
as musicians along with the blacksmiths. Blacksmiths do not eat with
them or take their women as wives. Merely to drink water out of an-
other man's vessel conveys no pollution in Spiti, and in the higher parts
of the Spiti valley the hookah is also common to all : while in the lower
parts Hesis are merely reqoired to smoke from the bowl of the common
pipe through a stem provided by themselves.
BETU, the synonym for Dági (q.v.) used in the Saráj tahsil of Kullú,
Beraí, a Sayyid clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Bakbea, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán : à sept of the Samwas in
Bahawalpur.
BÁBRÁ, fem. Bhábří, a caste of the Jainis, chiefly engaged in trade. The term
Bhábrá appears to be of great antiquity, being found in an inscription of
Asoka. The name is now fancifully derived from Bhạobhala, one of
good intent,'t but in Jullundur the Bhábrás attribute their name to
their refusal to wear the janeo at the instance of one Bir Swami, who
thereupon declared that their faith (bhú) was great. The term Bhábrá
however appears to be used by outsiders of any Bániás, especially of
the Oswals and others whose home is in Rajputána, whether they
antiquis derived fortribute the is wrami, who
• Be-nawá can be the only correct form, meaning "without the necessaries of life,” a
å mendicant.
+ Bhao, motive, hbala, good



81
The Bhábra groups.
are Jains by religion or not. This would appear to be the case in
Ráwalpindi, and in Sirsa the Sikh immigrants from Patiala certainly
call the Oswál Bánias Bhábřás.
The Bhábrás of Hoshiarpur are an interesting community. As
a caste they have two groups, each comprising various gots or als,
viz. :-
GROUP I.-Oswáls.
Gots.
Bhábhú.
Ranke.
Nahar.
Lohra.
Karnatak,
Gadhia.
Seoni.
Baid.
Mahmia.
Tattar.
Bbandári.
Duggar.
Barar.
Chatar.
GROUP II.--KHANDERWÁLS,
Liga.
Gots.
Bbaursa.
Seoni.
Sethi.
Bhangeri.
The Oswal came originally from Osia in Jaipur, the Khanderwal from
Khandela in Jodhpur. As to the origin of the got names, Mahmia or
Maimia is derived from Mahm, the town in Rohtak, and was originaliy
called Dháriwál. Seoni (which occurs in both the groups) is a Kbatri
clan. The Liga (who perform the first tonsure, or mundan, at home)
came from Sultánpur, in Kapúrthala : the Tandwái, of Tánda (? in
Hoshiarpur) are an al of the Bhábhús, formed only a 100 years ago and
not yet à got. The Nahar or "lions' once drank the milk of a lioness
and hail from Jaipur. The Gadhia are called Churria in Rajputána.
Most Bhábrás cut their boys' hair for the first time at Dádi Kothi (now
called Kangar Kothi), their temple near Jaijon. Most of the Hoshiarpur
Bhábrás are Oswáls, of the Bhábhú and Nahar, those of Báláchaur being
Gadhia and Nahar by got. Some Bhábrás respect Brahmans and employ
them on social occasions, at weddings and funerals, and for the shrádhs,
though the Jain tenets forbid the shradh observances. The Khanderwáls
alone appear to wear the janeo. In Jind the Jains are said to be
recruited from the Aggarwal,* Oswal, Srímál, and Khandelwál Bánias,
but the last three are also styled Bhábrás-whether Jains or not.
Jain Aggarwals are said to intermarry with the Vaishnava Aggarwals
in that State but not in Karnál. Another account from Jind states
that the Oswal are bisa, i. e., of pure descent, while the Srímál are only
dasa, i. e.,t of impure descent, and that these two groups do not in,
termarry. The Oswal are also stated to avoid only the paternal got
* An account of rather doubtful authority makes the Oswáls and Khapdelwáls only
• Bbáos,' the Bágrí form of bhái, 'brother'-and derives Bhábfá from bháo--because
Parasnáth was an Oswal of the ruling family of Osnagar. It makes the Aggarwalás
Saráogís, 1. e., sikhs or disciples. Each group is said to be endogàmous, i, e., Bhábrás do
not intermarry with Saráogís.
† Another account says that both Oswal and Srímál contain bisa and dasa classes, the
dasa being in a minority in both groups.



Bhachar--Bhagti.
in marriage, while the Srímál observe the four-got rule. On the other
hand the Bhábrás of Nábha are said to have two sub-castes: Oswal, who
observe the four-got rule, and Kundewal (? Khandel wál), who avoid only
the paternal got in marriage.* And again in Máler Kotla the 'Bhábrás
or Oswals' are said to avoid two gots. The Jain Bhábrás are strictly
monogamous, a second wife not being permitted during the life-time of
the first under any circumstances. For further information regarding
the Aggarwal, Oswal, etc., see Bánia, and for the Jain sectarian
divisions see JAIN.
BAACHAR, a Khokhar clan (agricultural) found in Sháhpur.
Baadan, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BAADDAR, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
BHADIÁR, a tribe of Játs, in Siálkot, which claims Solar Rájput origin and
is descended froin its eponym. A tú, 7th in descent from him,
came from Ajúdhia and took service under the Rájás of Jammú.
BĦADRO, an ARÁIŅ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Montgomery.
Bhagaň, a Jâț clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Bhagar Bhagwán. See under Ubásí.
BHágat, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
BHAGAT-PANTHÍ.- A sect of the Nának.panthís which appears to be quite
distinct from the Bhagtis or followers of Bábá Suraj of Chába Bhagtái
in the Kahúta tahsíl of Ráwalpindi. It is found in the Bannu District,
in Pahárpur, and in tahsil Dera Ismáil Khán. Though they reverence
the Granth, the Nának-panthís observe the usual Hindu ceremonies at
marriage or death, but the Bhagat-panthís do not. They take the
Granth to their houses, and read certain portions of it at weddings.
Marriage and betrothal ceremonies may be performed at a dharmsála,
or the marriage may be celebrated by taking the Granth to the house
and there reciting portions of it. No funeral rites are performed and
the dead are buried, not hurnt. Passages from the Granth are read
for a few days after the death. And on occasions of marriage or death
karáh parshád is distributed. There is no rule of chhút or 'touch,'
forbidding contact with other castes. The sect makes no pilgrimages,
avoids idolatry, and performs no shrádh for the dead. Daily worship
is an essential duty and consists in recitations of the Granth at six
stated hours of the day, viz., before sunrise, before noon, afternoon,
before sunset, in the evening and at night. At worship they sit down
eight times, rising eight times and making eight prostrations. This
sect thus strives after pure Sikhism and freedom from Brahminical
supremacy.
BHAGGO, a sub-division of Jáțs.
BHAGTI, a Gosain sub-sect or order, said to have been founded by Kánshi
Rám, a brother of Sáindás. The latter was a Brahman Bairagi whose
son Rámáband has a shrine, well-known in and about the Gujranwala
District, at Baddoke. His sect has mauy followers among the more
:respectable Khatrís and Brahmans of Lahore and its neighbourhood.
the deadle reciting portionelebrated by La be porformed alt at wedding
* Till recently the Oswal of the Punjab avoided two gots in marriage, and the Dhundias
among them still do so, but in 1908 a great assemblage of the Pojeras resolved that only
the paternal got need be avoided.
+ This is however said to be merely a counsel of perfection.



Bhagliá-Bhango.
Bhagtíá, a musician who accompanies dancing boys.
BHAIŅs, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BHAIŅsií, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BHAJOKÁ, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
BHÁKari ; see BAKHRI.
BHAKRAL, one of the group of tribes which hold considerable areas in
the south-east of the Ráwalpindi District. The Bhakrál are also found
in some numbers in Jhelum and Gujrát. Like the Budhál they
probably came from the Jammu territory across the Jhelum. They do
not approve of widow marriage. A large number of the tribe also
return themselves as Punwar in Ráwalpindi, and the tribe may be
classed as Rajput.
BHAKRí, a Sayyid clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BHALAŞ, a Ját claa (agricultural) found in Multán.
BHALERAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán
BHALKÁ, & sept of the Baloch in Sindh, Bahawalpur, and Dera Ghází Khán
said to be addicted to robbery.
BHALLOWÁNá, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
BHAMAN, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BHAMRÁí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BHAMYE, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BHÁND, BHAND.-The Bhándor Naqgál is the story-teller, joker, and
buffoon, and is often also called Básha. The name comes from the
Hindi bhanda “buffooning." He is separate from, and of a lower
professional status than, the Bahrúpia. Bcth are commonly kept by
Rájás* and other wealthy men like the jester of the early English
noble, but both also wander about the country and perform to street
audiences. The Bhánd is not a true caste any more than the
Bahrúpia, and is probably often a Mírási by caste. Elliott seems to
imply that Bahrúpia is a caste and Bhánd an occupation; but the
former statement is certainly not true in the Punjab.
BHAŅDAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BHANDELA, a minor caste found in Sirmúr, and corresponding to the
Sikligar of the plains. They appear to have come from Márwár in the
Mughal times and retain their peculiar speech and intonation. Sikhs
by religion, they are dealers in arms, etc, by occupation, and are said
to be much given to crime.
BAAŅDER, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BhaŅggí, fem. BHANGGAN (also a woman who drinks bhang). A man of the
sweeper caste: also a man belonging to the Bhanggí misl.
BHAŅOGIÁ, fem. BHANGGERAN, a dealer in bhang.
Bhango, a tribe of Játs found in Sialkot which claims Solar Rajput
ancestry and is descended from its eponym, who caine from Nepal.
Also found in Amritsar (agricultural); and in Montgomery as a Hindu
Ját clan (agricultural).
in Amritsake orrespondin var in the
* Kádeh Bhárd, known as Kadir Bakhsh, was a famous Bhánd; who ured to go icm
one court to another. The Mabárája of Patiala gave him a village,
.



84
Bhangú-Bharái.
BHANGO, Bhanggú,* a Ját tribe which does not claim Rájput origin. The
Bhangú and Nol were among the earliest inhabitants of the Jhang
District and held the country about Shorkoț, the Nol holding that
round Jhang itself before the advent of the Síáls, by whom both tribes
were overthrown. Probably the same as the Bhango, supra.
BAANíwál, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BAANJRÁ, a synonym for Domná in the lower hills of Hoshiárpur and
Gurdaspur. He makes sieves, winnowing fans and other articles
of grass and bamboo. Like the Sansois, Sariáls and Daolis, the
Bhanjrás may be regarded as an occupational group of the Dumnás, with
whom they intermarry.
BHANOT, a Rájput clan which occupies a bárah or 12 villages immediately
north of Garhshankar round Padráwa, Salempur and Posi. The
name is fancifully derived from ban, because they once dwelt in the
banot or shadow of the ban or forests of the Siwáliks, and they are
said to bave come from Bhátpur, & village close to that range not
now held by them. They appear to have been an al of the Nárús.
BHANRÁŇAYE, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BHAŅĶAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar..
BAANWÁLA, a small Ját clan in Jínd, whose gathera is a Gosain.
BHAO, a sept of Raghbansi Rájputs, found in Gujrát, immigrants from
Ajudhia into Jammu and thence into the Gujrát sub-montane.
The name, which perbaps suggests a Rájputána origin, is said to be
derived from the fear (bhao) which the tribe inspired: but others
say the Bhao were free-booters and honce earned the title. ;
The Bhao rank high, and they, the Manhás and Jural, greet one
another • Jai deo.' They also intermarry with the Chibhs of Kadhále
and Ambariála ; but not with the rest of that tribe, owing to an
ancient feud. The first tonsure is performed at Kilít, a place in
Samrála, in Jammu territory,
BAÁB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BHARAH, BAÁBAH, two Ját clans (agricultural) found in Multán: (possihly
one and the same).
Bparaís-The Bharáis who are scattered throughout these Provinces are
also known as Pirhain,t a name which is explained thus:-
☺) One Bukan Ját was a devotee of Sakhi Sarwar who one day said
to him tujhe piri di, the saint's mouth has fallen on thee,' whence
the pame Pirhai.
(ii) Another accouot says that after leaving Dhaqokal, Sakhi Sayyid
Ahmad went to Multan and rested for a while at Parahin, a place
south of Shahkot, which was the home of his mother's ancestors,
Rihan Játs by caste. At Multán an Afghán chief had a daughter to
whose hand many of the Shábkoț youths aspired, but nopo were deemed
* The Panjabi Dicty. gives Bhangús (sic) as an original tribe (M.).'
+ The form Pirhain is said to be in use in Saharanpur. The word pariah, is also said to
mean drummer and is possibly connected with Bharái.- Crooke : Things Indian,
Sancient feudala; but they also in



our protectii Kakki! Walia-Helps
Bharái traditions.
86
worthy. One day, however, the' Afghán invited Sayyid Ahmad to a
feast and begged him to accept his daughter in marriage. This offer
the saint accepted, and the sihra below, wbich was composed on this
occasion, is still sung with great reverence. The mirási, however,
neglected to attend the wedding punctually, and when he did appear,
rejected the saint's present of a piece of blue cloth, 18 yards in
length, at the instigation of the Játs and Patháns, saying it was of no
use to him. Hearing this the Sayyid gave it to Shaikh Buddha, a
Ját who had been brought up with him, saying: “This is a bindi
(badge), tie it round your head, and beat a drum. We need no
mirási, and when you are in any difficulty remember me in these
words :-Daimji Rabdia sawária, bohar Káli Kakki-wália-Help me
in time of trouble, thou owner of Káli Kakki! You and your
descendants have come under our protection, panáh, and you shall be
called panáhi." This term became corrupted into Parahin in time.
Thus the account contradicts itself, as the name is said to be derived
from Parahin, a place.
The term Bharáí itself is usually derived from chauki bharná, lit.
to keep a vigil,' in which are sung praises of the Sakhi. But another
and less simple account says that owing to his marriage Sayyid
Ahmad incurred the enmity of the Játs and Patháns of Shăhkot and
left that place for Afghánistán, accompanied by Bibi Bai, Ráná Mián,
and his younger brother. Twenty-five miles from Dera Ghází Khán
they halted. "No water was to be found, so the Sayyid mounted
his mare Káli Kakki and at every step she took water came up. His
pursuers, however, were close at hand, and when they overtook him
the Sakhi was slain, and buried where he fell. The spot is koown as
Nigáhá and still abounds in springs.
Years after Isá, a merchant of Bokhara, and a devotee of Sakhi
Sarwar, was voyaging in the Indian Ocean when a storm arose. Isá
invoked the saint's aid and saved the ship. On landing he journeyed
to Multán where be learnt that the saint had been killed. On reacbiog
Nigáhá be found no traces of his tomb, but no fire could be kindled
on the spot, and in the morning as they loaded the camels their legs
broke. Sakhi Sarwar descended from the hiļl on his mare, holding
a spear in his hand, and warned the merchant that he had desecrated
his tomb and must rebuild it at a cost of 11 lakhs. He was then to
bring a blind man, a leper, and an eunuch* from Bokhara and
entrust its supervision to them. One day when the blind man stumbled
near the tomb he saved himself by clutching at some kahi grass where-
upon bis sight was restored and his descendants are still known as the
Kahi. The eunuch was also cured and his descendants are called
Shaikh. The leper too recovered, and his descendants, the Kalang, are
still found in Nigáhá. To commemorate their cures all three beat a
drum, and Sakhi Sarwar appeared to them, saying: “He who is my
follower will ever beat the drum and remain barahi,t 'sound,' nor
will he ever lack anything." Hence the pilgrims to Nigáhá became
known as Bharaía.
* For eunuchs as attondants at shrines see Burton's Pilgrimage to Medina and Mecca
Vol. I, p. 871.
70ť. Bhara in the phrase raho hara bhara, 'romain green and prosperous or fruittule,
P. Dy., p. 480,



Bharái-Bharbhúnja.
Strictly speaking the Bharáís do not form a caste, but an occu-
pational group or spiritual brotherhood which comprises men of many
castes, Dogar, Habri, Ráwat, Dúm, Rájput, Mochi, Gujar, Tarkhan
and last, but not least, Ját. They belong to the Muhammadan religion,
but in marriage they follow the Hindu customs. Thus a Ját Bharáí
may only marry a Ját woman, and in Kángra, it is said, she too
must be a Bharáí. In Ambála, however, a Bharái may marry
any Játni, and in Kapúrthalá it is said that, being Muhammadans,
marriage within the got is permitted, and that Rajput Bharaís
may take wives from Ját Bharáís. There appears indeed to be no
absolute or even general rule, but the tendency apparently is for the
Bharáís recruited from any one caste to form a separate caste of
Bharaís, marrying only in that caste, e.g., in Ludhiana the Ját Bharái
only marries a Bharáí Játni, and the gots avoided are the same as
among the Játe. The Ját Bharáis are numerous. They claim descent
from one Gárba Ját, a Hindu attendant at Sakhi Sarwar's shrine, who
was in a dream bidden by the saint to embrace Islám. On conversion
ho was called Shaikh Gárba. The Ját Bharáís have several gots :
Dhillon, Deo, Rewal Garewal, Mán, Randháwa, Jbam, Karhi and
Badecha.
Marriage Dower. The amount of mehr, given according to Muham-
madan Law to the wife by the husband, never exceeds Rs. 32-6; while
the minimum dowry given to the bride by her father consists of Rs. 21
in cash and 5 copper vessels.
Insignia.- The Bharái's insignia are a drain (dhol), beaten with a
curiously-shaped stick, like a short crook; a wallet (khallar) hung
round the neck by a string. The stick and khallar are peculiar to the
Bharaís. The standard of the Pirhais is a fringe (jagádhri) of tassels
on a long pole. These fridges are presented by women as thank-
offerings for the birth of sons and at weddings. They are supposed
to be tied round the forehead of the saint as they would be tied on a
bridegroom's forehead,
Food. It is said that in many places Bharáís eat oply goat's flesh,
and that leprosy would afflict him who ate any other kind of fash.
But this restriction is certainly not universal. Beef is avoided; because,
it is said, the Bharáís have many Hindu votaries.
BHAŘÁL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BAARÁNCE, a small Ját clan in Jind who have the same Sidh as the Kale
(q. v.).
BHARAT, a tribe, which gives daughters to the Jálaps, found in Jhelum.
BAAR BANCHI, a class of Jogís who charm away scorpion stings.
BAARBHÚNJAS--Bhárbhúnja, lit. one who roasts grain in an ovenform an
occupational caste comprising only 4 gote, viz.:--
1. Jádubansi . (an Ahír got).
2. Bhatnagar)
3. Saksaini si .... (two Káyath gots).
... (a Brahman got).
* Básdoo, father of Krishna, appears to have been worshipped by the Ahirs also.



Bharbhúnja groups.
.
87
harge spoon, though witl a differy, or drink
As the gots are so few, only one got is avoided in marriage, bat the
caste is said to be strictly endogamous in Patiala, and outsiders are
never admitted into the caste.
By religion Bharbhúnjas are both Hindus and Muhammadavs. Like
other Hindus the former invoke Sadá Shiva when commencing work,
as the shop is regarded as his țhará (platform). Subháo, another
deola, is also worshipped at weddings, sherbet and some copper pice
being offered him, and cooked food distributed in his name.
A Bharthúnja wife may not wear glass bangles or blue clothes or a
nose-ring (laung).
Bharbhúnjas only make barís at weddings; and only eat food
cooked by Brahmans. They wear the janeo, but permit karewa, the
husband's brother's claims being recognised. They preserve an old
system of local panchayats, with hereditary chaudhrís, in which all
caste disputes are settled. At weddings, etc., the chaudhri gives the
lág and receives 14 shares in the bhájí. Bharblúnjas mostly pursue
their creed and calling, but some take to service. In appearance they
are dark and under-sized.
In the Nábha State the Bharbhúnjas have two occupational groups,
the Dhankuta or “ rice-huskers ” (from dhán, riør, and kutná) and
the Malláhs or boatmen. These two groups do not mtermarry, or drink
together, but they smoke front the same huqah witl & different mouth-
piece. The Malláhs use a large spoon, the Dhankutås a sharp crooked
instrument, in parching gram. Both groups are found in the Báwal
Nizámat of this State. In the Phúl and Amloh Nizamats the Káyasths,
a sub-group of the former, claim origin from that caste, and it is said:
Parhgiya jo Kayastha, warna bhatti jhokan lá'iq: "He who acquires
knowledge is a Káyastha, otherwise he is only fit to parch grain.' Hence
many Káyasths have joined the Bharbhúnja caste. Iu Báwal the
Bharbhúnja gots are named from the place of origin, e.g., Mandauria,
from Mandaur in Alwar, and Chhátagia from Chbátag.' Elsewhere their
gots are Jádú-bansi, Chandar-bansi, (claiming Rájput origin) Bhatnágar
and Chandan Katar, and of these the Bhatnagar again suggests
Káyasth affinities. The caste is endogamous, and four gots are
avoided in marriage, but widow marriage is said to be only allowed
in Báwal. Játs, Gújars and Ahírs take water from a Bharbhúnja's
hands, but Bánias, Khatrís and Brahmans will only take fresh water
brought by him, pot from one of his vessels. The gurus of the
BhaỊbhúnjas are always Brahmans and perform the phera. Their
women wear no nose-ring, its use having been prohibited by a sati
in each group. The Bharbhúnjas of Bawal affect the cult of Bhairon,
to whom the Malláhs of Agra used to marry their daughters. Tradition
says that the god once saved a boat from sinking and thenceforward
the family married one of their girls to the god and left ber at his
shrine where she survived for less than a year. But now only a doll
of dough is formally married to the god. Other Bharbhúnjas also
reverence Bhairon, and their guru is Subhán Sáhib, whose sbride is
in a town to the east. He is worshipped on the bhái dúj day in Kátik.
The Bharbhúnjas of Phúl and Amloh have a peculiar form of be-
trothal contract. The bride's father goes to the bridegroom's and
gives him 4 Madsúri pice, and the latter gives him twice as much in
and perces
handan bams, Chandad, Chhatag place of or caste



Bharech-Bhargava Dhúsar.
return. This is called paisa bataná or exchange of presents, and the
contract is then said to be irrevocable. If any one violates it without
reasonable cause he is excommunicated by the chaudhrís, but may be
re-admitted op payment of a fine which is spent for the benefit of the
brotherhood. All the Bharbhúnjas, except those of Báwal, wear the
janeo. If a traveller or a wedding party of Bharbhúnjas halts in any
village the Bharbhúnjas there are bound to entertain the whole party,
otherwise they are excommunicated.* .
The Bhaſbhúnja in Delhi claim to be Jaiswál Rájputs, and have three
gots, Jaiswal (the highest), Kherwá and Tájúpuria, which all intermarry
and smoke and eat together. Each village has a chaudhri and of
two chaudhrís one is called chaukrát. The chaudhrí can only act with
the advice of the panchayat. Each chaukrát has what is called the
half pagri' and each chaudhri the 'full pagņi.' The chaudhrá has
jurisdiction over petty disputes within the caste. Fines ranging from
Re. 1 to Rs. 100 are levied and the smaller sums spent on feast,
while larger fipes are expended on such pablic objects as guest-houses.
Each chaudhri and chaukrát gets double bháji at weddings.
BHARECB, (Barech more correctly), one of the branches of the PathÁNS.
From it was descended the family of the Nawabs of Jhajjar which was
called Bahadurwati after the name of Bahadur Khán, one of its members.
The State of Bahádargarh (Dádri) also belonged to this family.
BAARETLA, & term said to mean silver-smith, in the Simla Hills. The
Bhareras intermarry with the Lohárs.
BHARGAVA DøÚSAR, DAÚNSAR, a sub-division of the Gaur Brahmans, now
mainly employed in trade or as clerks. They give themselves the
following pedigree :-
BRAHMA.
Bhrigu x Paloma Rájá Sarjaiti, a Kehatriya.
Chiman rishi x Sukanya.
(Barech more couple the family of the adur Khán, one of its on
Pramata rishi x Ghartachi.
Aurab Rájá Gadh, a Kshatriya.
Ruru x Parmadabra.
Rachik x Satwati Rájá Parsainjat.
Sonak.
Jamdagnva X Ránuka.
Parasurama.
All the descendants of Bhrigu and Chiman were called Chimanbansi
Bhargavas, and as Cbiman the rishi used to perform his devotions at
the hill of Arahak, near Rewárí in Gurgaon, which is now called Dhosi,
those of his descendants who settled in that locality becane known as
Dhúsars. Chiman rishi bas an ancient temple on this hill and a new
one was built in recent years. , Adjoining these temples is a tank, the
Chandrakúp. The Dhúsars have the following seven groups or gotras :-
* Popular legend distorts this descent in a curious way. It says that once Chaman, a
Brahman of Nárnaul, took as his mistress a woman of menial caste, who bore him 7 sons and
as many daughters. When asked to marry them he bade them appear on an amáwas with
a cow and made each touch its different parts : só one touched its tail (puchal) and founded
the Puchalar gotra; another its horns (sing) and founded the Singlas gotra, and soon. Each
gotra bas five parwaras, except the Káshib which has three or occasionally seven. The Kásbibs
are thus known as triparwaras or saptparwaras and the other optras as panchparwarns



Bhargava Dhúsar history.
| Number.
Name of the
Rishi after
whom tho | Real gotra. Current gotra.
gotra was
named.
Parwars.
Other parvoars.
1 Batus ... Bátasus, Bats Bachehalas.. 'Bhargava, Chiwan, Apan.
wan Aurab, Jamdagan.
Batsi ... Bátsus ... Bachehalas | Bhargo, Chiwan, Apanwan Bachhal, Argan, Ba.
Aurab Bansi.
tasth.
Bidas .. Bidsus... Bandlas ... | Bhargo, Chiwan, Apan-
wan Aurab, Baind.
Kaunsi ... Kilsus, Gir. Gaglash ... Bhargo, Chiwan, Apan. Kans, Aurab, Jamad,
itismad.
wan Aurab, Jamdagan. Ganpat.
Kan gain Pa Gangayans, Kuchlas ... Bhargo, Chiwan, Apan. Gargil, Dhist, Mand,
garhismad, Garbagus
wan Aurab, Jamdagan. Chiwan, Vaisham,
Gargal. Kuts.
Mapusát.
Goshtain en. Goshtains
| Bhargo, Chiwan, Apan- | Bhargo, Chiwan, Ja.
titled Gala. entitled
wan Aurab, Jamdagan, mad, Gaupat.
Galas. | Golash.
| Kashab ... | Kashipoh... Kashib ... Bhargo, Sait, Habia Sad Kaghab, Rats, Bhar.
tasya.
go, Chiwan Apan.
wan, Aurab, Jamad,
Ganpat.
The Dhúsars affect the Yajur Veda, the Madyandani sakha and the Katyani sutraj auu
invariably wear the sacred thread. Only the Brahma form of marriage is tolerated among
them and in the choice of a bride the gotra and worshippers of the same kul levi (family
goddess) are avoided. Widows never remarry.
The Bhargava Dhúsars claim to have given a long list of parohits and ministers to Hindu
kings, from Chanda Bhargava who officiated at the sarp yag or serpent sacrifice originated by
Raja Jamaijaya to Hemu Shah, the Baqqal of Rewári, who revolted against Akbar, as the
following table shows :-
BHARGAVA PAROHITS AND MINISTERS TO HINDU KINGS.
PAROLIS AND MINISTERS TO UNDE EN
Cortina
Name of parohit and
minister.
King.
Yudhisterian Samvet Bik-
era.
ram.
Christian
era.
Sanapat Bhargava Sayanak
... | 1429
Mahipat Bhargava
to
I to
Sira vidat Bhargava wid | Suraj Saia
1800
their descendants.
Jag Narain Bhargava and Birshah to
1800 to
his descendants : Padhmal
2251
Samdat Bhargava and Murar Singh to
2319 to
his descendants
Jit Mal
2503
Jai Narain Bhargava and Pal Singh to
2638 to
his descendants
Bhagwant Kohi
Sundarpál Bhargava ...
Rája Bir Bikramajit ...
Indarpál Bhargava and Samandarpál Jogi to ...
his descendants
Bikrampál
Jaideva Bhargava and Tilok Chand to
his descendants
Kuar Sain
Indroman Bhargava and
Hari Sain to
his descendants
Jaipál
Sheo Narain Bhargava and Kaurpál to
his descendants ... Pirthwi Raj
(Rai Pithora)
... 3097
... 3110
135 to
298 A.D.
310 to
367 to
617
579 to
522 to
926
1000 to
943
· 1141



90
Bharhi Bhatia.
BHARHI, & tribe which claims descent from Gaur Bráhmans, and observes
the same ceremonies as they do, but at a wedding performs seven
pheras instead of four. Work as sculptors, etc. (Found in Gurgaon).
Bharoí, fem. BAAROIÁ, s. m. one who attends travellers at a bharo.
BHARTH, an agricultural clan found in Shábpur.
BHARTA, a Rájput sept found in Gujrat, descended from their oponym.
BHARWAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BĦARWANA, (1) a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Mont-
gomery; (2) a clan of the Siáls, descended from Bhairo.
BHARYÁR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BAÁf, see under Bhatt.
BAATE, an Aráíņ and Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Baári, see Bahti.
BHATí, a Ját, Aráin, Gújar and Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
also a Ját and Rájpat olan found in Multán.
BAÁTI, a tribe of Hindu Rajputs, chiefly interesting as being the ancestors
of the Baartí Rájputs and the SIDHÚ Barár Játs, as the following table
show8:-
BHÁTI, BROTHER OF SUNRIJA.
Dusál.
Jaisal.
Hinda Bhátís.
Junhár or Já unra,
Batera.
Achal
Sidhu Barár Barsi.
Rájpal.
Játs,
Bhatti Rajputs.
Wattú Rájputs.
[Fagan-Hissar Gazetteer, pp. 124, 127 -- 129.]
BAÁTIA.--- A caste originally from the country round Delhi but more recently
from Bhatper and the Rájputána desert, and claiming to be Rajputs
of Yádubansi race, one branch of which became rulers of Jaisalmir
while the other took to commercial pursuits. The name would seem
to show that they were Bhátis (Bhatti in the Punjáb); but be tbat
as it may, their Rájput origin seems to be unquestioned. They are
numerous in Sind and Guzerat where they appear to form the leading
mercantile element, and to hold the place which the Arorás occupy
higher up the Indus. They have spread into the Punjáb along the
lower valleys of the Iudus and Sutlej, and up the whole length of the
Chenáb as high as its debouchure into the plains, being indeed most
numerous in Sialkot and Gujrat. In these Provinces however they
occupy an inferior position, both in a social and in a mercantile sense.
They stand distinctly below the Khatri and perhaps below the Aroſa,
and are for the most part engaged in petty shop-keeping, though the
Bhátias of Dera Isma'il Khán are described as belonging to a widely
spread and enterprising mercantile community. They are often
supposed to be Khatrís, are very strict Hindus-far more so than the
other trading classes of the Western Punjab_eschewing meat and
liquor. They do not practise widow-marriage.



ola
The Bhatia sections.
91
The Bháția caste has 84* sections, called mukhs, divided into two
groups thus-
GROUP I.-BÁRI—
Sections.
Status
Sections.
1. Babla
7. Gandhi.
2. Dhagga Dháighar.
8. Chacbra.
3. Anda
Chárghar. 9. Chabak.
4. Baláha
10. Kandal.
5. Jáwa
11. Ghangbal.
6. Soni
12. Kore.
Both Baláha and Jáwa claim to be charghar. All the above sections
are of Bárághar status. It is hardly necessary to explain that
dháighar may not give daughters to any but dháighar, though they may
take from chárghar and so on. A breach of this rule involves degrada
ation and hence the same section may be both dhaighar and charghar.
GROUP II.-BUNJÁBI, which comprises the remaining sectionst such
as Baila, Choták, Dholia and Naida.
There are no territorial groups, but the orthodox idea among the
old men is that daughters should be given to the Western Bhátiás
of Shábpur, Jhelum and Dera Isma'il Khán as they are of superior
status to those in Gujrát, while tbe Eastern Bbátiás of Sialkot and
Gujranwala are considered inferior and wives are taken from them.
It should, however, be noted that in Baháwalpur these groups
appear to be unknown, but of the
sijwala.
Babla.
sections given in the margin the
Gandhi.
Wanjak.
Sijwála is the highest and the Rilla
Choohre
Ra-rakha.
S sip.
Chachra (An.Sip. Challhar.
the lowest. The Bhátiás have a
Wadoja.
Rilla.
proverb dhan di wadi ai' or
Dhagga.
Wattu.
: wealth is greatness:' In Baháwal.
pur, they live in large rectangular hawelis, each comprising 30 or 40
houses.
1. Rai Gájaria, from
9. Rai Paleja, from Paleja & village, the
2. Rao Haria, from Rai Hari Singh, a home of Parma Bháti, in Márwár.
bhagat.
8. Rai Ved (Waid), from Man Singh, son
3. Rao Sapat, from Sáptá, a village of of Megh Ráj Bhátí who was skilled in
Márwár, the home of Bímá, a Bbáti. The waidak (physic); all the Bhátís who
Bhátís of Sáptá were great devotees of joined him became Rai by sept.
Devi and as such held in great respect. 9. Rai Surya, from Sura Bhátí who fell
4. Rad Paral-sauria, the sept of the five in battle.
heroes,' Jasaji, Ráwalji, Nawal Singh, 10. Rai Ditya, from Dúta a village, the
Jodhráj and Bír Singh who fell bravely home of Arjan Bhátí, a bhagat of Deví.
fighting in Jaisalmír. Bahádár Singh 11. Rai Gokal Gándí, from Gokal Gándi
belonged to this nakh. -All the above of Multán under whom served Nawal, son
nakhs affect Deví.
of Ráwal Bhátí. Ráwal fell in battle.
5. Rai Rámayá, Agai.ráj, brother of 12. Rai Gádá, from Gádá Bhátí, a bhagat
Rám Chandar was a great bhagat who of Hanumán.
was ever repeating Ram's name.
13. Rai Nae Gándí, from Megh Ráj, son
6. Rai Padamsi, from Padamsi Bhátí who of Jodh Ráj. Megb Ráj opened a shop
fell bravely fighting in battle. He had at Baháwalpur, and was known as Niya
a son Udhe Rai.
Gándí.
* An 85th is also named below.
† There is also a lower group called Gand, the offspring of Bhátiás married to Arora
women or of widow remarriages The Pushkarna Brahman is their parohit,



92
The Bhatia sections.
14. Rai Midia, from Medi a village, the 42 Rai Dhaba, from Dhaba mukhia of
home of Kumbha Bhátí, who fell in Rori village, who raised camels there.
battle. He had a son Oga, who was a 43. Rai Dhíran, from Dhíran Bhátí, who
servant of Bahádar Ali, Nawáb.
fell in battle. He had a son Udhe Rai.
15. Rai Chhachia, from chhe (six). Six 44 Rai Bhagta, from Bhagtánand Bháti,
families joined Desa Bhátí.
who showed great valour in the Jaisalmír
16. Rai Bablá, from Babllá, son of Jodhá war.
Bhátí, of Nígú village.
45. Rai Birá, from Birá Bhátí, who showed
17. Rai Panchál, from Panchálpuri, the great valour in battle. He was a bhagat
home of Rai Bhím.
of Deví,
18. Rai Gulgula, from Gulgula Bhátí who 46. Rai Thulá, from Thulá, a village of the
was killed in battle. He had a son Mán Thatí.
Singh..
47. Rai Sodhayá, from sodhá, a casto,
19. Rai Subra, from Subra, the name of a Singh Mal Bhátí having married the
baithak* of Bhátis.
daughter of a Sodhi Rajput.
20. Rai Nágrá. -trom Nágrá, a village in 48. Rai Búrá, from Búra Bhátí of Bakhar
Márwár.
village.
21. Rai Saraki, from Nawal Saraki, the 49. Rai Múchhá, from Arjan Bhátí, who
name of those who sided with Nawal was nicknamed Arjan Muchha, as he bad
Singht in a dispute about some custom long moustaches. He was a bhagat of
which the Qází decided in his favour.
Jasra Deví, and wore the 5 kes.
22. Rai Soni, from Son a village, whose 50. Rai Tamboli, from Nanda and Niga,
spokesman was Ratan Rai Bhátí.
tambolis (betelnut-sellers). They were
23." Rai Sopla, from Bhopat Singh Bhátí. bhagats of Shiva.
24. Rai Jiá, fron. Jiá Bhátí who display. 51. Rai Thákar,
ed great courage in the army.
52. Rai Bisnaw, from Bisanwant Bhátí,
25. Řai Mogia, from Mogia Bhátí who fell who was a man of great good furtuno.
fighting
He had 4 sons. All the members of this
26. Rai Dhadha, from Dhadhalu, a village family specially worshipped Rám Chandr
of the Thatí country.
and in one year 107 sons used to be born
27. Rai Riká, from Riká Bhátí, who fell to it.
fighting. He had a son Gassa.
53. Rai Bhudria, from Bhudar, a Bbáti.
28. Rai Jidban, from Jidhan Bhátí, who 54. Rai Indhar, from Indhar, a branch of
was a great cultivator.
the Bhátís.
29. Rai Kothia, from Kothiar, a village. 53. Rai Dhadhál, from Dhadhála village,
30. Rai Kotha, from Kothapur, a village. the home of Rámá Bhátí
31. Rai Dhawan, from Dhawan Rai, who 56. Rai Beg Chandr, from Bogá and Chan.
was famed for his generosity. He had a dá, Bhátis, who were customs collectors.
son Meghá.
57. Rai Bipal, from Bipal, the residence of
32. Rai Devla, from a famous Deval Bhátí, Kunbha and Kaná, Bhátís.
who lived in the village of Gánth.
58. Rai Pothá, from the brothers Pothá,
33. Rai Jiá, from Jiá Chádak, a cultivator, Parmá and Nágá, Bhátis.
who lived in the Márwár Thatí.
59. Rai Premla, from Prema and Parma,
34. Rai Baura, from Baura, a village in Bhátí Rájputs of Rásá village.
the Thatí.
60. Rai Pärdhagá, from Puradh, a yag,
35. Rai Dhage, from Dhaga Bhátí, who performed by Káná and Kumbha, Bhátis,
fell bravely in battle.
who were followers of Gurú Nának.
36. Rai Kandhya, from Shuja Bhátí, who 61. Rai Madhrá, from Madhra Bhátí, a
though bis forehead was split in tho Jai. servant of a Khán at Multán, who gave
salmir war, yet his trunk fought on for much in alms.
a long while.
62. Rai Pharás Gándí, from Pharás, the
37. Rai Ráthia, from Ráthia Bhátí, of name of Jítá Mal, Bhátí, who had transac-
Ratnár, a village in the Thati of Márwár. tions with Maujád Khan in Multán. He
He was famous for his hospitality.
had perfumes, oil and attar
38. Rai Kajriá, from Kajaryá, a village 63. Rai Puri Gándi, from Paro, a Bhátí,
towards Multán where Man Singh mukhia
performer of Raipul.
lived. He had seven sons, all called 64 Rai Jujar Gándí from Jujar village,
mukhias.
the residence of Ajít Singh and Ránpha,
39. Rai Sijwálá, who were proficient in Bhátis, who sold perfumes.
archery.
65. Rai Panwar, from Panwár, a branch of
40. Rai Jabálá, from Jabálá, a village in the Bháti.
Sindh.
66. Rai Prems 8áj, from Prema and Sujá,
41. Rai Malan, from Malan, a family of the song of Gondha, Bhátí.
Gogla village, whose members knew an. 67. Rai Rájs, from Rájú, & village in
tidotes to poisons.
Márwár.
* A room or building where male visitors are received.
+ Not apparently the Nawal Singh of No. 11. This Nawal Singh was in the employ of
ODO Qutb Khan.



Bhatianin. Bhátrá.
0g
68. Rai Parjia, from Parja, a caste. Rásan, 78. Rai Nisát, from sat (juice) bocause
son of Bhim Singh, Bháti, in a fight with Samún and Ramún extracted juice from
robbers killed 100 of them, while on wheat and made halwa of it.
his side only two of his 5 sons and 6 79. Rai Udesí, from Udhe Rai, the elder
Bhátis fell.
son of Parma. Bháti. He had a bitter
69. Rai Kupwár, from Kapúrá, a Bhátí, feud with his younger brother.
who attained a great age.
80. Rai Budhiya, Bhoj Ráj, Bhátí, did
70. Rai Dhádar, from Dhadar, a village Bádh Pal's work, had camels and hired
in the Punjáb.
them.
71. Rai Kartaryá, from Kartarya, the 81, Rai Balai, from Baláya-kar, a village
family name of one Kání Bhátí.
in the Punjáb which was the home of
72. Rai Gogla.
Bhán, son of Bhoj Ráj.
73. Rai Kukar, from Kukar, a village in 82. Rai Pawar, from Pawri village, the
the Punjáb.
home of Premán and Parmán..
74. Rai Multáni, from Multán where Jodú 83. Rai Kíná, from Kíná (enmity). The
Rai, a Bhátí clothier and his family lived. family of Mósá destroyed their enemy.
75. Rai Chamájá, from Chamójá, a village.) 84. Rai Káziá, from Kází. Ir Val, Bhátí,
76. Rai Dhiyá, from Dhiyá, a village. ! who worked as a clerk under a kází of
77. Rai Karan Gotá, from Karna, Bhátí, Bahawalpur.
who was called Karna after his gotar. 85. Rai Mota, from Moti, daughter of Nárú
Two of them, Múl Ráj and Megh Ráj, 1 Mal Soháná, a resident of Multán.
served with distinction under the Nawab
of Baháwalpur.
BRATIANI, a donkey owner in Dera Ghází Khán, who also bakes bread
while his womenfolk act as midwives Said to be connected with the
Kahárs and Kumbárs.
Bháſí-DÁR, one on whom land is bestowed as bhátí, i.e., a rent-free grant of
land given to a Brahman or jágér by a ruler.
Baari Wád, a tribe of játs found in Siálkoţ which claims Solar Rájput
descent and originated in Ajudhia whence its eponym migrated to
Amritsar, where it is also found as a Ját (agricultural) clan.
BAÁFRÁ.---Like the Maniár, Banjára and others the Bhátrá is a pedlar.
He claims Brahman origin, and his traditions say that one Mádho
Mal, a Brahman rishi, a singer and a poet, once loved and wedded
Kám Kundala, a dancing girl. From this pair are descended the
Mádhwás or Bhátrás,* The latter word appears to be a diminative
of the Sanskrit bhatta, a bard. However this may be, a curious
legend accounts for the Bbátrás' location in the Panjáb and their
conversion to Sikhism. Mádho was born and died in Ceylon,t but
in the reign of Bábar, Gurú Nának visited that island, and there
made a disciple of Changa Bhátrá, de descendant of Mádbo. The
Adi Granth records that 20 maunds of salt a day were required for
Changa's numerous followers, many of whom were converted to
Sikhism and followed Gurú Nának back to India.
The Madhwas, however, did not at first settle in the Punjáb.
Originally they were to be found chiefly in the Dadra Des, along
the banks of the Ganges in the Bijnor District of the United
Provinces, where many of them are banjáras or pedlars by trade,
some hawking cheap ornaments for women, others 80-called Vedic
medicines. I Thence they migrated into Hoshiarpur and Sialkot, but
* This tradition is said to be preserved in the Mahabharata and Singhisan Batísi. In a
parwána of Mahárája Ranjit Singh of 7th Asauj, 1866 Sambat, and now in the possession
of a Bhátra of Dhariwal, the Madhwás were exempted from the grazing tax.
+ A Sikh temple, known as Dera Bábá, was built in Ceylon to the Gurú's memory at the
Má thwás' original home.
Gullible patients are made to sigu bonds for Rs. 50 or so, as the Bhátrá's fees
if they recover.



The Bhát or Bhatt.
they are now to be found in the great towns and places of pilgrim-
age all over India. In Hoshiarpur the Bhátrás are virtually all Sikhs
(though children under 12 have their heads shaved) and here they
pose as magicians, foretelling the future by gazing into a cup of oil.
Thence they mainly frequent the Kángra District. In Siálkot a moiety
are true Sikhs, observing all the Sikh customs, and often posing as
gurús, Akálís or Nihangs when on their wanderings.* They prey on the
credulity of the people by astrology. The other moiety are jatadhárís,
but smoke, and generally assume the characteristic garb of the
Udásís, pretending to be emissaries of certain temples and col-
lecting subscriptions for them. After the Diwali the Bhátrás set
out on their tours, returning at the commencement of the rainy
season. They travel in gangs generally of half-a-dozen or so, and
the Sikbs are occasionally accompanied by their wives and
daughters, for whose marriages they collect subscriptions. Various
forms of swindling are practised by them and they earn large
sums which they promptly squander on drink and gambling.
Besides bawking small hardware for sale they pierce children's noses
and ears for rings,t like the Ramáiya of the eastern districts.
The Bhátrás' claim to Brahminical origin is borne out by the fact
that they wear the janeo and tilak, and even at eclipses receive
certain offerings, while standing in water, from each and every caste.
They also practise palmistry (rekha). Other castes call them harar-
popo or Thags, and the higher Brahman groups disown them.
Probably they are a branch of the Dakauts.
The Bhátrás have 22 gots, of which 13 are found in Sialkot, viz. :-
Bhains.
Gami.
Kasba.
Lohi.
Bhatti.
Gojra.
Lande.
Ráthor.
Bhotiwál.
Lar.
Rod.
Digwá.
BAAȚt, fem. Bhatten, Bhatění, Bhátní, Bhatání : dim. Bhatetá : fem.
Bhațeti, the son or daughter of a Bhatt: also, contemptuously, any
one of that caste. The Panjábi form is Bhatt, but it is very commonly
pronounced Bbát, especially in the Hills.
The organisation of the Hindu Bháts almost baffles description, so
fluid are its intricacies.
In Hissár are found two sub-castes, Brahm and a few Ráj. The
former are clients of the Mahájansi, performing certain functions for
them at weddings, &c.; they wear the janeo, avoid widow marriage,
and only eat food cooked by a Gaur Brahman ll, while the Ráj are land-
holders and cultivators, receiving dues at Ját weddings.
The Brahin, Brabma or Brahmí Bháts are very widely spread, and
always appear to stand higher than the other sub-castes or groops,
which vary from place to place. Thus in Rohtak the other groups are
* Recently, however, some of them have taken to disguising themselves as Bairági
sádhús. Others, of Daska, make an indelible mark on their necks and call themselves
Hosaini Brahmans, collecting alms from Muhammadans.
+ See p. 268 of Punjab Manufactures for the implements used.
$ And also of the Brahmans in Rohtak.
§ They sing kabite in public when the bridegroom first sets out for his father-in-law's
house, receiving a rupeo as their fee on this occasion and also at the kdj of an old man.
|| Or Aggarwal Mabájans in Rohtak.
Kag.



The Bhát groups.
three in number, viz., Jagge or Tappawár,* Chárant, and a fourth
class, to which belonged Udá Bhát. $ The Jaggás comprise the Bbaria,
Roria, Sbakkarwálá. Solanki and other gots.
In Gurgaon on the other hand the Bhát or Rai, as he is called, is de-
scribed as a Mírásí, and is divided into four classes :-
1. Brahm, Rai, Bháțs of the Brahmans.
2. Bero (Baro) Rai, of the Rájputs.
ITS 3. Ráj Rai, who eat fiesh and drink liquor,
14. Jagá, or genealogists : of whom I is superior to II.||
The Brahm group then extends right across the south of the Punjab
into Multán, Dora Ghazi Khán, Dera Isma?l, Miảnwali and even Bannú:
the group below them being called Kátímár. I
On the other hand in Multán the Brahm Bháts are said to be divided
into four classes :-
Chandí Dás.
Mahal.
Jangá Bhambá.
Sutrak.
This group is also called Vateshar and regards itself as Bahri or
superior, while the Bunjáhís, who are not recognised as Brahm Bháts,
comprise the following gots :-
Agan-hotrf.**
Lakhnaurí.
Dehi Palsihar,
Chandan.
Manjhor.
Shenor.
Dharor,
Palsihar.
Sipal.
Gbanghar.**
Pali Palsihar,
Sugerlu.
Gurú Dat.
The real grouping in Multán however appears to be into four func-
tional groups, viz. :-
1. Brahm, eulogists and genealogists.
2. Vartishar, who live upon dues payable at weddings and funerals
for their services. At weddings they summon the brotherhood, and so
on. At deaths they notify its members, and also procure certain
* Jaggi, so called because they rise early and seated on their patron's roof recite his
genealogy. Tappawár is not explained.
+ Cháran, a wanderer, pilgrim : singer, dancer: Platts, sub voce.
But another account says the Bháts include the following classes : Brahm (the only one
found in Rohtak), Jaggá, Ráj and Cháran, (already mentioned), together with the Mona
and Garara.
& Apparently sub-castes : if not, I and II each form a sub caste. But it is also said that
the mirásis of the Rájputs are called Ráná or Ucharn Bháts, the Ránás being story-tellers
and eulogists, as well as genealogists. And yet another account divides the Bháts into four
classes :-(1) Rai Bhát, or 'meistersingers,' (2) Ránás "heralds who used to act as envoys.
as well as encourage the fighting men by their singing of legends, (3) Kathaks or musicians,
and (4) Jagás or genealogists and story.tellers,
The following kubit from Gurgaon describes the superiority of the Rai Bhéts:-
Hamin That, Bamin Bhatt, tiamin Bhaunra, Hamin Bhági,
Baman bir Betál, Hamin jangul ke joge,
Kaprá pharen máng karar bándh mandar arer.,
Betál kahen Bikram suno dev dán kírat karen.
ll The Bhát gots are:--Bimblán, Bhardwaj, Chand Bardai, Chandían, Kaliá, Mirchal, Sair,
Tind and sodhián.
But according to an account from Multán the groups are four, viz. :-Brahm. Vartesh.
war, Chandísar and Kutichar, each with functions of its own.
*** These two gots are by some classed as Brahm, in other words some of their members
are of Brahm status, others only of Bunjáhí rank,



96
The Bhát groups.
articles for the corpse. At funerals their females take part in the
siápá (mourning), being paid annas 2 per day. At a girl's wedding they
get Re. 1-8, but at a boy's only Re. 1, the sum which they also get
at a funeral. Their perquisite on other occasions is called vel badhai..
3. The Chandísar live in the villages and live by begging The
Kátí márs who used to be numerous in Multán, are an off-shoot of
this branch.
4. The Kutichar are vagrant beggars.
Accounts from Mianwali, in which District the Bháts are very few
in number, give a threefold division of the caste, as follows:
isi. Brahmi.
ü. Kátímár or Sheni Khel..
lii. Khosla.
“ iii. Baddú.
I performs ceremonies : II does not, though at weddings the Kátímár
sing songs of congratulation. The Baddú is virtually an out-caste.*
A second account points to the fact that the Bháts derive their origin
from the Pushkarná Brahmans as well as from the Sársut, and says the
Pushkarná Bhát are equal in status to' the Sársut,t though the status
of the sections varies, and a family whose widows marry outside the
brotherhood is looked down upon.
Lastly a third account gives the old functional groups: the Sút who
sing songs and recite chronicles in the afternoon 'I ; the Mágadh, who
keep pedigrees of kings, and recount their deeds : the Windíján, who
teach princes ; and the Bhát or Jagakę who sang songs in the early
morning hours to awaken the king. Yet this game account divides the
Bháts into B ahms and Kátímárs.
In Multán, tahsil Shajábád, only the Brahm and Rátímár groups are
known. The former comprises 7 gots: Chandí Dás, Mahol, Sutrak,
Changar, Palsa, Chandaria, and Channan, all of which are said to be
Sársut gots and intermarry. The Kátímnárs, also said to be Sársuts,
form a distic ct sub-caste. They have, as a rule, go clients, and live
by blackmail, but in Shujábád itself they receive fixed dues (from one
to four aonas a head at weddings). They still compose kabits which
the Brahm Bháts do not.
In the accounts from Karnál, Patiala and Kapúrthalal allusion is
átímetimes you who sell
given.
POSAKARNA 3 Agur.
* The Baddú takes alms from Muhammadans, which other Bháts will not do. No other
will eat with him, yet he wears the janeo. His corpsg is not burnt like a Hindú's, but is cast
into & stream. It is to be regretted that no further particulars of this interesting group sro
+ It is said that the gots are :-
Chandí Dás
( Panian,
| Gandhor.
) Josi.
SÁRSUT
| Harar Rai.
Hatiára
(Ghangar.
| Kátimár?
(Thor, etc.
| Just as the Jaggá have a stated time for their recitations : see above.
Ś Not to be confused with the Jájik, who in Dera Ghází Khán is a sewer of shrouds : 800
infra.
|| In Kapúrthalá to the Sút is assigned the duty of reciting verses from the Puráns : and
to the Magadh that of eulogising the Surajbans, Chandrbans, etc., while to the Vandijan is
allotted the recitation of chronicles, and eulogising Deo, rikhi, pitar and Hari ki nundan,
whence they are designated Kabisbars or bards. The latter also announce betrothals, set :
forth the dowry at weddings, and so on.



The Bhát groups.
97
made to an older and apparently extinct organisation of the Bhát caste
into three main groups, viz. :-
1. Sút, reciters of myths.
2. Mágadhs, chroniclers.
3. Vardís, or Vandijan, who acted as advisers to Rájás and as
poets laureate.
The Vandís alune are found in Patiálá where they are known as
Brahma Bháts or Brahma Rais. They wear the janeo and retain their
Brahminical gotras such as Konsal (in Kapúrthalá), Bhardwaj, etc.
In their internal grouping the Brahm Bháțs imitate the · Khatri
organisation, baving two groups as follows:-
1.-BÁRÍ, OR THE 12 GOTS.
1. Gun deo. 4. Lakhan Sain., 7. Bhárámal. 1 10. Phág.
2. Kataria. 5. Dhúr.
8. Táhú. 11. Chandí dás.
3. Paņgan. 1 6. Bisbel or .we. 9. Kalian. | 12. Dhíran.
and of these nunibers 1-6 form a Pháíghar group, which avoids only
one got in marriage, (as indeed does the whole Bári group, apparently)
whereas the Bunjáhís avoid four. This latter group includes the
fullowing gots :-
Bhuládia. | Manohia. Súrián. | Tuhánia, eto.
Malaunia. | Saroha.
Tetia.
On the other hand in Shahpur the Bhát are divided into Bunjáhís
and Khokhars, the latter suggesting the Khokharain group of the
Khatrís, thus :-
Section.
Gotra.
Ayúpotrí.
Bhardwaj.
| Dherry.
1.-Bunjáaís. Jandídás.
Koshal.
Máhal.
| Rai Pál.
Sigarre.
Kushab.
Nadhipotre.
Bhárdwáj.
11.-KHOKHARS.
| Apat.
Bálash.
(Jain. .
Of these the Jain section will intermarry with any other, but
from the above notes it is abundantly clear that the Bháts are
simply an offshoot of the Brahmans, being differentiated from them
by function. And to explain their origin various legends have been
invented. One is that when Janmeja celebrated a sacrifice he sum-
moped the Gaur Brah mans and tricked one of them into accepting an
offering of a diamond by concealing it in some pán. This Brahman
became a Bhát. Another, to whum Janmeja offered a gift, refused it
and became a Taggá. Another is that Shiva was celebrating the
marriage of his son, and giving alms to Jogís, Jangams, Saniásís and
Suthrás, who received them with a good grace. Thereupon the god
asked if apy would coretrain him to give alms, and a drop of sweat
falling from his brows to the ground the first Bhát sprang from
Vashist.



98
Bhát legends.
it, with a katár in bis hands, and uttered a kabit which runs:-"O
goddess Káliká, give the Bhát a katár whose sight will cause a close-
fisted man (shúm) to flee. Let the Bhát cleave him from head to foot
with his katár." Shiva replied :-"O Betal Rai, Bhát, I would bave
given you the kingdom of the whole world had you not appeared thos.
Now I grant you great influence and all will be terrified at your voice,
but you will get what you may." This kubit, obtained from a Bhát,
would make all the Bháts professional extortioners. A third tradition
is that Brahmá offered gifts to Brahmans, but they all refused it, until
one of their sisters' sons accepted it and thus became a Bhát.
Two legends from the Simla hills also describe the origin of the
Bháps. The first explains how they acquired the power of reading
men's thoughts. Under Rájá Bhoj,* it says, lived Kálí Dás, a famous
Bhát who held that a man could say anything he wished in poetry,
and so Kálí, the goddess, pleased with his devotion, conferred on
him the power of thought-reading. The other legend goes further
back, and describes how Rájá Jaswantt had a wise counsellor in a
woman Khankáli. Once when he was holding his court at Srinagar
in Garhwál the Rájá of Márwár, Jagdeo, came to see him and found
him and Khankáli in council. The lady veiled her face, explaining
that as a man had come to that cowardly court she could not show her
face before him. This reply naturally annoyed Jaswant who declared
he would give her 10 times as much as Jagdeo would bestow. Khankálí
then went to Jagdeo's tent; but as he was at his devotions his Rání
gave her a dish full of gold coins and gems which Khankálí refused to
accept, as she could take no alms from a woman. When the Rájá
came sbe presented him with a rupee, as a narr, and said she was the
wife of a Bhát and had come to demand dán (charity), which one of
Rájput blood could not refuse. He bade her ask a favour, and sbe de-
manded his head, which the Rájá at once cut off, and she carried it in a
dish to Rájá Jaswant. Tauntingly Jaswant asked what she had got
from Jagdeo, who had fled from his own kingdom and sought a refuge
with himself. In reply Khankáli showed him the head and demanded
those of himself and his 9 sons in fulfilment of his vow, threatening him
with the ruin of his kingdom if he refused. The king's son's, his queen,
and he himself, however, all declined to sacrifice their lives in fulfilment
of the Rájá’s rash promise:
Kbankálí then returned to Jagdeo's tent. She had forbidden his
queen to burn his body till she returned, and when she found the Ráuí
lamenting over his corpse she restored it to life and promised him the
empire of all India. This he soon achieved. In the first encounter
Jaswant was overthrown and Jagdeo seized bis kingdom. Gradually
'he subdued all the petty chiefs in India, compelling them to pay
6 ann as in the rupee as tribute. From Khankálí and Káli Dás the
Bhát chain descends.
In Sirmúr the Bháțs are by origin Brahmans,I 'but having adopted
Karewa they lost status and are now by occupation genealogists.
Many, too, are cultivators and trans-Giri mairy with Kanets. The
* cf. Legends II, p. 183.
"+ See Legends of the Punjáb III, pp. 242, 252.
There is a Wateshar or Bateshar group among the Brahmans also.



The Muhammadon Bhat.
99
Bháts of Náhan retain Brahman customs, but those of the interior havo
adopted those of the Kanets. With the Kapets the Bháts furnish the
Dewás or priests to the temples. Trans-Giri there is a sub-division of
the Bháts called Deti, but the rest of the Bháts do not intermarry with
them and they are inferior to the other groups.
TAE MUHAMMADAN BEÁȚs.
The Muhammadan Bháts are even fewer in numbers than the Hindu,
and far less elaborately organised. In Hissár they date their con-
version to Alamgir's reign, and still cootinue to minister to Mahájans
and other Hindus as well as to Mughals and Pírzádas, but Shaikbs
only fee them at a daughter's wedding; as do also oilmen and weavers
who give them 8 annas. But they get fees on the birth of a son. In
Rohtak they have only three sections, Bijbán, Síl Sahá and Gur Deva,
of whom the latter recite genealogies and compose songs.
Their patrons are Muhammadan Rajputs and Hindu Mahájans, and
they receive
Ceremony.
Function,
Feө.
Girl's betrothal
Boy's ,
Girl's
Birth of a son
The Bhát women sing songs and chant 8 Mansúrí takas.
kabits.
The Bhát women sing songs and also the Re. 1 or as. 8 with takas.
brotherhood.
Women sing bandháwa
8 iukas for each.
Sing congratulatory songs
Re. 1.
At weddings when the dower arrives the Bháts read out the list of articles and recite the
following kabiti-
Zar kisi sone gota kinári murassa inotí kanchan chhahbhari hai,
Kímkháb atlas báwalá jhurm lát mehndi moti sut pás dhari hai.
Bhúkan rátub hírá panná jaşáo jarat gird men chhuháre sab nár kahin khari hai.
Sundar sohág bhag bhari jaisi khilli phul jhari hai.
In Shahpur the Muhammadan Bháts are divided thus:-
Section.
Gotra.
Chúrál.
Koshal.
| Panj.
Samít.
(Gudrál.
11. Kaprál, which is said to be purely endogamous and not to
marry with any other Bhát under pain of excommunication. The
other four sections marry inter se.
The Baár's FUNCTIONS.
The functions of the Bhát differ in different parts of these Provinces.
In the south-easteru districts he is not ontrusted with any religious
functions at all. Thus in Rohtak the Brahm Bháys merely get
anpas 4 to 8 on the bridegroom's departure at a wedding; and the
guests at a rich man's funeral are invited through a Bhát, who receives
Re. 1 in cash, and a turban when the pagrí is tied round the heir's
head. A Bhát also sommons the kingmen to witness an excommuni.



100
The Bhat's functions.
.
cation or a re-admission into oaste.* As we go westward, however, the
Bhat's functions become more definite, assuming at times almost &
priestly colour, while his perquisites are correspondingly larger and more
certain. Thus in Kapúrthals the Brahm Bħát sings congratulatory
songs at a betrothal, at the saia chitthi, at a chhotá tíká, or marking
of the bridegroom's forehead, the milni, t or meeting of the bride and
bridegroom, at the lawán or turins, the mittha bhát and tho chirkani,
receiving a fee of annas 2 or so, together with other rails.
After a death the Bhát remains for 13 days in the deceased's house
and helps to procure what is required ; at a shúnt he gets a rupes;
and at a súch he gets a similar too with certain clothes :-
power
OR WAV.
VAV
N
OPRA
DA
NO
.
NI
S
tou
.
.
.
Ceremony.
Function
Warriages,
r(1) Marriage procession ... sing Manglachár kabits ... 1 or % annu.
(8) Pilra
Ditto
1 anna.
(3, Dowry ... ... Proclaim publicly the presents given 4 annas.
as the dowry.
(6) Warisui ... ... Carry baskets (chhabás) of dried
fruits, eto., to the bridegroom's
father's house, and chant congra.
tulations to the pair.
(1) Procession to the funeral (0) Sew the kafan I ... ... ... 25 &nbas.
pyre.
(ii) Buy what is necessary for the
. deceased's relatives.
|(iii) sing in the procession.
() Sidpd for 1st four days... À B hátní leads the mourning of the 8 annas or 1 rupeo.
women of the brotherhood.
(8) Dahaya ... ... ..
On the tenth day the Bhátní ag- 2 annas and i nors of
sembles the women in the house of wheat flour.
the deceased's heirs.
(4) On the 13th day ... A Bhát assembles the male members 1 annan
of the brotherhood, and the deceas-
ed's heir is proclaimed.
(6) Dharm shánt ... ... On the 17th day the shrádh is per- A meal of cooked food.
formed.
Lunerals,
In the western districts the Bbátní fulfils the duties of a professional
mourner. Thus in Shahpur she leads the mourning by the women
of the deceased's brotherhood for a fee of Re. 1, and in Dera Ghází
Khán she does this for a wage of 21 anpas a day, besides what the
relatives may give her.
In Kángraç the only relic of the Bhat's former functions is the
making of kabits, and a proverb runs :-Bhát ki bhet kabit, i.e., a Bhát
will always make a present of a kabit. Like the parohit and the barber
* This account comes from the Sample tahsil of Rohtak. Elsewhere the Bháts merely
sing congratulatory songs on auspicious occasions for a fee of four double-pice, raised at
weddings to Re. 1.4-0.
+ They sprinkle the red coloured water on the white garments of the wedding guests.
I But in Dera Ghází Khán this is done by the Jájik,
§ This is the account from Hamirpur. In Núrpur tahsıl Bháts merely visit the house of a
nowly married couple and receive a small fee, earning their living by cultivation. In
Kangra tahsil they sometimes at a wedding get a fee called durbhia, which varies from
3 pies to 2 annas: they also get one at an investiture with the janeo, and at weddings the
girl's father gives his Bhát annas 2 and some cloth, while the boy's Bhat gets Re, 1.4.0, but
they porform no rites.



toi
Bhattahár-Bhatti.
they are looked apon as ligis, but are virtually only employed as
messengers at weddings, being puid a trille by the recipient for the
messago (neondar). In the Hill States, however, ten or twenty Bháts
sometimes collect and recite kabits, receiving a sum of money, called
rinj, which is divided proportionately among them, the Bhat of the
rájá who gives it getting the lion's share. In former times, it is said,
they were compelled to work, but this is not now the case. Elsewhere
the Bhát is now, speaking generally, a cultivator or a servant to a
Mahájan.
The Bháts act as parohits to the batrís, while their own parohits
and pádhas are Sársut Brahmans.
BHATTAHÁR,-HÁRÁ, fom.-hárí, Bhattiár,-árá, a person who takes food to
labourers in the field.
BHATȚI. The name Bhatti would appear to be unquestionably connected
with Bhát, Bhatt, Bháți and Bhatiâ, Bhatt bearing the same relation
to Bhát as Jațg to Jat, kamm in Punjábí to kom, etc. As a tribe the
Bhattis are of some antiquity, numerous and wide-spread. They give
their name to the Bhaçţiána* and to the Bhattiorat tracts, as well
as to various places, such as Bhatinda, Bhatner, Pindi Bhattián and
possibly the Bhattiát in Chamba. Historically the Bhattis first appear
to be mentioned in the Tarikh-i-Fíroz-sháhi of Shams-i-Siraj Afif, and
the following notes are called from the translation of tbåt work in
Elliott's Hist. of India :-
In the reign of Alá-ud-Dio, Tughlik of Khurásán obtained the
district of Dipálpur, of which Abohar was a dependency. Ta Abohar
were attached all the jungles belonging to the Míní (Mína ?) and
Shaţți tribes. Tughlik, anxious to ally his family with the native
hiefs, heard that the daughters of Rána Mall Bhatti were beautiful
and accomplished, so he sent the amaldár of Abohar to negotiate the
alliance of one of them with his brother, Sipahsálár Rajab. In his
pride the Rána rejected these overtures, and so Tughlik proceeded to
levy the outstanding revenue from the talwandis of the Bhattis with
great severity. The Rána's daughter, Bíbí Náíla, hearing of this, urged
her own surrender. Consider,' she said, 'that the Mughals have carried
off one of your daughters.' She was accordingly married to Rajab,
assumed the name of Bíbí Kadbánú, and became the mother of Firoz
Sháh III in 1309 A. D.I
In 1394 Sárang Khan was sent to Dipálpur to suppress the
rebellion of Shaikha Khokhar. There he raised troops and, taking
with him Rai Khul Chain Bhatti and Rai Dáúd Kamál Main (? Mína),
he crossed the Sutlej near Tirhárah (Tihára, in Ludhiana).
Io 1389 we read of Rai Kamál-ud-dín Main (? Mína) and Rai Khul
Chand Bhatti whose fiefs lay near Sámána, being sent with Prince
Humáyún to raise troops at that fortress.Il
* See the art. Bhattiána in the Imperial Gazetteer,
+ In the Chiniot uplands north of the Chenab.
I E. H. I. IIf, pp. 271-2.
$ E. H, I. IV, p. 29.
i E.H. I. IV, p. 22.



-
"
.
102
Bhatti clans.
Tímúr fouod Bhatner under the rule of Rao Dál Chain,* Rájpat,
and probably a Bhatti. Curiously enough he is represented as having
a brother named Kamál-ud-dín, and in one history Khul Chain is said
to have been the Rai of Bhatoer.t
Agaia in 1527 we read of Mirza Kámrán's coming from Lahore, with
many horses and much wealth taken from the Bhattis and Khokhars. I
The legends of the Bhattis are, however, silent on these events and
ascribe the origin of the tribe to Achal through Barsi, who extended
his dominions from the south to Bhatner, which they held until expelled
from it by the Rájá of Bikáner early in the 19th century. Then they
spread over Bhattiána, which comprised the modern tahsil of Sirsa
and the northern part of Fatebábád. The tribe is now found princi-
pally along the Gbaggar valley as far as Bhatner,
Various other traditions are, however, current in different localities
and of these the most probable is that which connects the Bhattis
with Jaisalmír. The story current in Hissár is that they were iu very
early times driven across the Indus, but returned and some 700 years
ago dispossessed the Langáh, Joiya and other tribes of the country
to the south of the lower Sutlej: and founded Jaisalmír, which State
they still hold. Bhatti, the leader under whom they recrossed the
Indus, had two sons Dasal and Jaisal. The former settled in Bhattiána
and from him are descended the Sidhú-Barár Játs, the Waţtu being
also descendants of his grandson, Rajput. With tbis tradition may
he compared the following detailed account of the Bhattis of Bahawal-
pur, in which State they have 15 principal clans :-
i. The Bhattis, or pure Bhattis, who are generally landow ors
or cultivators, though some are weavers and blacksmit:
ü, Pahor, found throughout the Lamma.
iii. Chús.
iv. Jogi and
V. Jandani.
These five septs are closely connected, do not give daughters on -
side the group, and usually intermarry.
vi. Shaikhra.
vi. Cbakar-Hulle : a small sept, of recent origin called Chakar
ullah or servants of God.
viii. Lallú.
ix. Bhábhe: a small sept.
x. Katesar: also a small sept, which rears sheep.
xi. Kulyár or Kawalyúr which has an interesting bistory :-
kulyár was a son of Ráná Ráj Wadban, who had four other sons,
(1) Uttera, (2) Nún, (3) Kánjún, (4) Határ. The tradition is that the
• The Zafarnáma has Chan, probably for Chand : or Chain may be due to some confusiod
obtween Sain and Chand. Tímúr explains that Ráo means 'brave.' (E. H. I, IV, pp. 428-8,
188-90.)
† 2. H. I. IV, p. 34.
. 1. I. V, p. 87.



Bhatti clans.
108
ancestors of Ráj Wadhan lived in ancient times near Ghajní, whence
they migrated to Delhi, which after a time they left for Bhatner.
In the 7th century of the Hijra Ráj Wadhan together with his tribe
left Bhatner and settled near Chhanb Kulyár (now in the Lodhrán
tahsil of Multár), which in those days lay on the southern bank of
the Sutlej and formed part of the dominions of Rai Bhuttá, the ruler
of a city, the greater part of which was destroyed by the Sutlej flowing
over it ; but parts of its ruins are still to be seen on the right bank
of the Gbára (in tahsil Lodhrán). Ráriá Ráj Wadhan had a beautiful
daughter whom Rai Bhuttá desired to marry. The request was refused
by Kulyár, the eldest son of Ráj Wadhan ; and the result was that .&
sanguinary battle took place in which Rai Bhutta was slain. The
tract of the country thus conquered by the Kulyárs became known as
Chhanb Kulyár, which name it still retains. At this time Sher Shah
Sayyid Jalal was living in Uch, where Ráná Ráj Wadhan and his sons
went to see him and embraced Islám. Ráj Wadban remained at Uch,
Utterá occupied the Viáh' (Biás)*, Nún began to live on the Rávi,
(and that tribe is now dominant in Shujábåd tahsil), Kanjún at the
Donári Mari (?), and Kulyár made Chbanb Kulyár his residence.
Határ was deprived of his share of the inheritance.f
xii. Daragh.
xiii. Sangrá : with a famous sept called Wági. In the 8th
century Hijra the Sangrás migrated from Rajputána and
settled in Kathála, then a large town on the Gurang or
Hariari, the ruins of which are still to be seen near Tibba
Tánwin-wala. Kathála was at that time held by the Joiyas.
xiv. Mahtam: the Muhammadan Mahtans claim to be Bhattis
and say a mírási once ironically called their ancestor
"Mahtam,' or chief. They appear to bo distinct from the
Hindu Mahtams.
Bhet: who claim to have been Bhattis who accompanied
Shaikh Hakim from Delhi, but are said ' by others to be
Dhedhs or Menghwals, whom that saint converted,
xvi. Markand, Bokha, Jhakhkhar, Dhandla, Phanbi, Birár,
Dadu, Kapahi (cotton-workers and reed-cutters), and
Káhín, are nine clans descended from the same ancestor
and they intermarry. Some are landowners, others tenants,
but some are boatmen, and though Bhattis by origin they
are regarded as of low status.
On the south-east border of the Punjab the subject population of
Bikáner is largely composed of Bhattis, and tradition f almost always
XV.
* The tradition is that in those days the Biás flowed separately to the north of Kahror
towards Shujá bád.
+ The Mittrú Bhatti of Multán say they came from Bikáner,
The Hissar tradition is very different and says that the khattis are of the Játu family,
and that like the Túnwar Rajputs they trace their origin to remote antiquity. At some
distant period, two persons named bbatti and Sumija are said to have come to this country
from Mathra. The latter had no male issue, ard bis descendants (called Joiya Rájputs)
live in Sirsa. After some generations (ne of the family of the former, named Kusálu,
became Rájá- he had two sons, Dusul aud Jaisul. 'I be latter became Rája of Jaisalmır,
where his descendants still reign. The former remained in Bhartiá na- he had quly ope son,
pamed Janrá, who had several wives (all of other castes) by whom he had 21 sods, whose



104
Bhatti traditions.
they put his Doáb, Bar pilti Rai Viry
carries us back to the ancient city of Bhatner, which lies on the banks
of the long since dry Gbaggar, in the territory of that State bordering
on Siria. But in that tract, which corresponds to the old Bhattiána,
the Bhatti, is no longer a dominant tribe and the term is loosely applied
to any Mubammadan Ját or Rajput from the direction of the Sutlej,
as a generic term almost synonymous with Ráth or Pachhada.
In the central Punjab, however, and towards the north of it, the
Bhattis, though scattered, hold strong positions. In Amritsar tradition
avers that they have a long pedigree beginning with Adam, 10th in
descent from whom was Krishna, son of Jad, the son of Jadam. And
the present State of Kapurthala was held by a Rájá who sought the
aid of Lakhanpál and Harpál, sons of the Ráná, Párab Chand, of Bhatner
against his foes. Accompanied by Panpál, a third son of the Ráná
by a Ját wife, they overran the neighbouring country ; but the Rájá
refused to give them the share he had agreed to bestow upon them,
so they put him to death and partitioned his kingdom, Lakhanpál
taking the Bári Doáb, Harpal that of the Bíst Jálandbar and Panpal
the modern Ferozepur District. Rai Viru, Lakhanpál’s great-grandson,
founded Vairowal in Amritsar some 540 years ago and his grand-
daughter, a sister of Rai Mitha, was married to Rai Ibrahîm of
Kapurthala, himself a Bhatti and descended from Harpál. But after a
futile attempt to subdue Rai Mitha, Ibrahím forbade intermarriage
between the two branches.
Kapúrthalá tradition is, however, quite silent as to Lakhanpál or
Harpál, and, according to legends current in that State, Rai Nának
Chand is said to have left Bhatner and settled in Bhalápa, in that
State. Three brothers Bhatti, Manj and Chauhan founded the Rajput
tribes so named, which settled in the Punjab only 14 generations ago.
Nevertheless reciprocal marriage is confined to the Bhatti, Manj
Nára and Khokhar* tribes, which avoid marriage with the Chauhan,
Awán, Nipál, Bajoha, Janjua, Panwar, Varyá.
The Khokhars and Nárús are regarded as foreign by race to the other
Rájpats, who all trace back their descent to Rájá Salivahan who has
a shrine at Sialkot He is said to have been defeated by Imám Násir.
In Gujrát the Bhattis trace their first settlements back to Dalla
Bhatti, Rájá of Pindi Bhattián who was put to death by Akbai. All
his family was in Akbar's camp on the Jhelum, where they were kept
in durance until released at the intercession of a faqir whose shrine
is still pointed out at Chbapar on the bank of that river. Dulla's son,
Kamal Khán was allowed to settle on the waste lands Dear Ghamán,
still a Bhatti village, while the rest returned to Pindi Bbattián.t
descendants established different tribes, such as the Lakhiwál, sidhú and Barar Játs. Janrá
founded the town of Abohur, naming it after his wife Abho-by this wife he had three
sons - Rájpál, Chun and Dhum :-the Wattú Rajputs are descendants of the first-the Mai
Rájputs of the second--and the Nawab of Rania and his family, of the third. Inasmuch as
the Bhattis were more numerous than the rest, the country was called Bhattiána. The
habits, manners and customs of Bhatti Rájputs are similar to those of the Tunwar Bájputs,
Hissar Settlement Report, p. 8, $$ 25, 26.
* The Khokhars (alone) give daughters to Sayyids.
+ The tribal. mérási gives the following pedigree of the tribe, which claims Maharaja Banjft



A Bhatti podigros.
105
The Bhatti of the Gujranwala Bár, where they are the “ natural
onunnies of the Virk," are descended from one Dhír, who eighteen
generations ago left Bhatner, and settled in the Núr Mahal jungles as
a grazier and freebooter. His grandson went further on to the banks
of the Rávi, and his son again moved up into the uplands of Gujráp-
wala. The modern descendants of these men are described as “ &
muscular and noble-looking race uf men, agriculturists more by
constraint than by natural inclination, who keep numerous herds of
cattle which graze over the pasture lands of the Bár, only plough
just sufficient to grow food for their own necessities, and are famous
as cattle-lifters aod notorious thieves." The Bhatti of Gujranwala
enjoyed considerable political importance in former times, and they
still hold 86 villages in that District. In Sialkot the Bhatti claim
descent from Bhoni seventh in descent from their eponymous ancestor
Bhatti, who came to Gujranwala from Bikáner, and thence to Siálkot.
None of these Bhatti of the Bár will give their daughters to the
Singh as one of its scions :-
PADAM RATA.
Wichar.
Bhaani.
Sahnsi,
Mahárája Ranjit Singh was
descended from this branch,
Kaji. Shadi.
Gajranwala
Nampal. Jarat. Gaundhar, Ratanpál. Sahnpal.
Gajranwála.
Tabsil Pbálisn.
Ato.
Amhar.
Dhairvi
Pindi Bhattián.
Ohs,
Ghawnaj.
Gujranwala.
Dáoa.
Karto.
Soo.
Lakhira,
Dehli and Bikánor.
Ohuhar.
Dhang.
Katho
Nathu.
Rai Puthoran
Gujranwala.
Bijli.
Farid.
Bablol.
Mastı. Dain. Dalla
Pindi Bhattián.
Mohammad Khan. Kamal Khan
Pindi Bhattián,
Gujret.
[another genealogy of the Bhattis neo under Sámil.]



106
Bhatti Chang-Bhittanni.
neighbouring Ját tribes, though they will take wives from among them
without scruple.* In the Salt-range the Bhatti seem to hold a very
subordirate position as Bhatti, though it may be that some of the
innumerable Rájput tribes of that tract may consider themselves
Bhatti, as well as whatever their local name may be. The Bhatti of
Jhang hold the considerable Bhattiora tract north of the Chonáb,
They came first from Bhatner to the right baok of the Jhelum nour
the Shahpur border, and thence to Bhattiora. They are described as
" a fine race of men, industrious agriculturists, hardly at all in debt,
good horse-breeders, and very fond of sport. They do very little
cattle-lifting, but are much addicted to carrying off each other's
wives.”.
The persistence of the traditions which connect the Bhattis with
Bikáner, Jaisalmer and the old fortress of Bhatner cannot be disre.
garded. But for a fuller discussion of their origins see RÁJPUT,
Bhattí is also (1) a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
as well as (2) a Muhammadan Kamboh clan (agricultural), and (3) a
Muhammadau Ját clan (agricultural) in that District,
BeaȚří CHANE, BAAȚří Naul, Bratří Tahar, three Rajput clans (agricultural)
found in Montgomery. Cf. Bháți Wád.
BpAwáná, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Berda, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
BAEKH-DAÁRÍ, BOEKHI, a faqir, a sádhú: from bhekh, dress, disguise, and so
'a sect of Hindu fuqírs'. .
Baidal, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Baikaárí, fem. -AŅ, a beggar
BAIKKAAK, bhichchak q.v.
Bain, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
BHindal, a tribe of Jáțs claiming Solar Rajput origin, through its eponym,
whose descendant Badar embraced Islám. It holds five villages in
Sialkot.
BHINDAR, & tribe of Játs of the Lunar branch of the Lunar Rajputs, through
its eponym, who settled in the Punjab under Rai Tanar. Found in
Sialkot.
Baistí, fem. -AŅ, (bhistá, facetiously), lit., a dweller in Paradise, fr. Pers.
bihisht ; a Muliammadan water-carrier.
BAITTANNI occupies a tract of hill country some 40 miles long by 12 to 16 wide,
stretcbiog along our border froin the Marwat tahsil of Bannu to the
Gúmal valley. Along the northern part of this line, it owos little or
*As among the Bubaminndan Chibh, Maphás and other tribes. A Játí who espouses a
Bhatti becomes a Bhattini by tribe according to the proverb Chhutti Rúja, te hoi kání :
'Touched by a Rájá (a woman) becomes a Rámii'
In Ludhiana the Shaikhg, a Bhutti clan, derive their name from Sbaikb Cháchu, a descend.
ant of Rájá Banshaun who acerpted Islám aud was granted the State of Hathur by the
Muhammadan emperors. For some other Bhatti clan numes soo the Appendix.



assist Wazloud, thout of the most the mobile nu
Bhojiya-- Bhojki.
107
no land in the plains; to the south it holds a strip of very fertile
country extending from the Takwára along the hills as far as Dabbra.
It has a few scattered hamlets in the Nasrán country north of the
Takwára, and is also found in.considerable numbers in the north-east of
the Gúmal valley. To the west the hill country of the Bhittannis is
hemmed in by that of the Wazírs. The two tribes are generally more
or less at feud, though the Bhittannis, till recently, never scrupled to
assist Wazír robbers in their incursions into British territory,
The Bhittannis live in small villages, generally hidden away in
hollows. Their houses are mud and brushwood hovels of the poorest
description, and sometimes they live in caves hollowed out of the
rock. One of their principal places is Jandola, on the road leading up
the Tánk zam to the Wazír country,
The tribe is divided into three sections : Dhanna, Tatta and Wraspún.
In the plains the lands of the Bhittannis were originally divided into
numerous small divisions, known as nálás. Each nálá, as a rule,
forms a single plot, owned by a number of families generally closely
connected by birth. The waste laud in each nálá is the property of
the ndlá proprietors. Before land became valuable, the proprietors
of the different níliís used readily to admit men of their own sub-
section to a share in the nálá lands, and in this way, men, who had
before lived exclusively in the hills, were continually settling in the
plains. There has never been, therefore, any actual division of the
country on shares, and the present proprietors hold purely on a
squatting tenure. The lands of the Wraspuns lie to the north, the
Tattas to the south, and the Dhannas in the middle. The Dhannas
own much less land than the other two sections, and fewer of them
reside in the plains. The plain Bhittannis live in scattered kirris or
villages. The larger nálás have separate kirris and headmen of their
own, but more generally the people of several nálás live together in
one kirri, under a common headman.
BHOJIYA, a Muharamadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BHOJKI, a term applied to the pujárís or officiants at the great shrines of
Devi, such as that of Jawalamukhi, that at Bhaun in the Kángra
District, Naina Devi in Hoshiarpur, etc. The Bhojkís were said by
Barnes to be " not Bráhmans, though they are the hereditary priests of
these celebrated temples. They all wear the sacred thread; they
intermarry among themselves alone, eat flesb, drink wine, and are a
debauched and profligate set; tbe men are constantly in the Courts
involved iu litigation, and the women are notorious for their loose
morality." Colonel Jenkins writes of them :-"The Bhojkís are
perhaps a unique feature of the Kángļa District. They claim to be
Sársat Bráhmans; but if so, have certainly sunk in the social scale,
as no ordinary Bráhmans would eat kachi rasoi with them. They
appear to occupy much the same position as the Gangaputras of
Benares, and the probability is that they are mere Jogís who have
obtaioed a reflected sanctity from the goddesses whose service they
have entered. The name is evidently conneeted with the Sanskrit root
bhoj to feed,* and is taken from the nature of their duties. They
theroes to Waina Detroit sa mujárís or
* The term is probably derived from bhoj in the sense of 'grant and the Bhojkls are
probably meroly beneficed Brahman dovotees of Devi,



kális : und in demselves
108
Bhojuánár-Bmúlar.
intermarry among themselves and with a class of Jogis called Bodha
Pandits. Another account states tbat the Bhojkis of Bhayn do not
give daughters to those of Jawalamukhi or Naina Devi, thooga ap
to Sambat 1936 they used to accept brides from the latter, whom
they regard as inferiors. The Bhojkís of Bhaun now only intermarry
among themselves, excluding their own got and the mother's relatives
up to the 7th degree. But thoy also intermarry with the Pandit
Bodhas and the Bararas. The former are said to be Bráhmans,
but both they and the Bararas take a deceased's shroud, etc., like the
Acháraj. The Bhojkís of Chintpurni are Bráhmans and marry witb
Brahmans, and will not even smoke with those of Bhaun, etc.”
BHOJUÁNÁ, a clan of the Sials.
BHOLA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BHOLAR, a Ját clan agricultural) found in Amritsar (same as Bhullar).
BHONAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BAOŅBYE, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar
BAOTAH, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BHOȚAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán (same as Bhuttar).
BHOTO, an ignorant hillman, a simpleton.
Bauchanaí, a title given to Akálís : fr. bhúchang, a black snake.
BAUKK, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery, Ferozepur, and in
Baháwalpur, in which State they call themselves Játs.
BAÚKYÁL, mentioned in the Tabaqát-i-Akbari as a tribe subject to the
Gakhars,* but in the Waki'át-i-Jahángírí they are said to be of the
same stock and connected with the Gakhars, occupying the country
between Rohtás and Hatyá, to which they give their name of Búgiál. †
BAÚLAR. --The Bhúlar, Her, and Mán tribes call themselves asl or
“ original" Játs, and are said to have sprung from the jat or “matted
hairs of Mahadeo, wbose title is Bhola simple') Mahadeo. They
say that the Málwa was their original home, and are commonly
reckoned as two and a half tribes, the Her only counting as a half.
But the bards of the Mán, among which tribe soveral families have
risen to political importance, say that the whole of the Mån aod Bhúlar
and half the Her tribe of Rajputs were the earliest Kshatriya immi-
grants from Rajputána to the Punjab. The head-quarters of the
Bhúlar appear to be Labore and Ferozepur, and the confines of the
Mánjha and Málwa; but hey are returned in small numbers from
every division in the Punjab except Delhi and Rawalpiodi, from almost
every District, and from every Native State of the Eastern Plains
except Dujána, Loháru, and Pataudi. The tribe is probably not a
wholly homogeneous one. In Jind its Sidh is Kalanjar, whose samadh
is at Mári, and to it milk is offered on the 14th badi of each month;
also cloth at a wedding or the birth of a son. In Sialkot its Sidh is
Bhora, whose khángáh is revered at weddings. In Montgomery the
Bhúlar are Hindu and Muhammadan Játs and classed as agricultural.
Baún, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpn
E.H. 1. V., p. 275.
† Toid VI, p. 309.



him. In Thange Plaines se Se also Bading
BhundáBibixas.
109
BHUND), an aboriginal tribe, a man of that tribe. (P. D. 145).
BAÚT, & tribe found in the Sadiqáhád kârdári of Babáwalpur where
they are landowners and tenants. They are formed from two distinct
groups, one a Baloch, the other a Ját sept, the former being few, and
the latter numerous. The Bhát Játs are possibly & branch of the
Abrahe, with whom they intermarry, but they are also said to be a
branch of the Bhattis.
BATTÁR, M., a landowner.
BAUTHA, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Sháhpur.
BAÚTRÍ, a Ját sept.
BAUTS, a Ját sept.
BAUTTA.—The Bhutta are said by the late Mr. E. O'Brien to have traditions
connecting them with Hindustán, and they claim to be descended from
Solar Rájputs. But since the rise to opulence and importance of
Pírzáda Murad Bakhsh Bhutta, of Multán, many of them have taken to
calling themselves Pírzádas. One account is that they are immigrants
from Bhután a story too obviously suggested by the name. They
also often practise other crafts, such as making pottery or weaving,
instead of or in addition to agriculture. They are said to have held Uch
in Baháwalpur) before the Sayyids came there. They are chiefly found on
the lower Indus, Chenáband Jhelum, in Shabpur, Jhang, Multán, Múzaf.
fargarh, and Dera Gbázi Khán. In Jhang most are returned as Rájputs.
The Bhutta shown scattered over the Eastern Plains are perhaps mem-
bers of the small Bhutna or Bhutra clan of Malwa Játs. See also Butar
and Búta. Maclagan describes them as a Játor Rájput clan found in
Multán tabsíl and allied to the Langáhs, etc., Bhutta, Langáh, Dahar,
Shajrá and Naich, being said to be sons of Mabli in the couplet:
Saghi, jihándí dádí, Sodí jihándé má,
Mahli jái panj putr-Dabr, Bhutjá, Langåh, Naich, Shajrá.
A branch of this clan at Khairpur near Multán is in the transition
stage towards becoming Sayyid.
According w tbe Baháwalpur tradition the Bhutta are of the same
stock as the Bhatia. * When Dowa Ráwal, sister's son of Rája Jajja
Bhatta, was building the fort now called Deráwar Jajja in a fit of
jealousy stopped its construction ; wbereupon his sister who was married
to a Bháția Rajput thus addressed him :-
Rái Jajja Bhutta sen wain ki bhain puchháe,
Kaya Bhutta kaya Bháția Kot usáran de.
“ His sister besought Rai Jajja, the Bhutta :
Whather thou art a Bhutta or a Bhátia, let the fort be built."
BHUTTA, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BIB, a small and humble (agricultural) tribe, holding one or two villages in
Abbottábád tahsil, Hazára district, and possibly connected with the
Awáns.
BÍBIZAí, a Patháp clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
* The Babáwalpur traditions make the Bháția (Jaisalmer family), the Bhuttas, Bhatti
and Wattús all one and the same family.



110
Bihanggan-Bishnoi.
ishnu. Dana-mana
38 thn baji"
BIHANGGAN, one who has not a fixed abode, a faqir who subsists on alms.
BILA), a low Purbiá caste of syces and grass-catter. But see also under
Chamár.
Biláirí, fem. -AŅ, a foreigner, a European or an Afghán.
BILHÁRÁ, described as a donkey-keeper, the Bilhará is really a branch of the
Mallál or Mohána (boatmen) group, like the Nihaya aod Manabhari.
In Bahawalpur they are cultivators as well as boatmen and own
several villages on the Chepáb and Indus. They are also found as land.
owners in Multán, Muzaffargarh and Dera Ghází.
BIMBAR, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BIRAJpání, a disreputable sub-sect of the Bam-márgi, q.v.
BISANOI,* Pablád Bánsí, (fr. Vishnu, one of the Hindu Trinity), a sect
whose founder Jhámbají lived towards the end of the 15th ceptury.
Tradition says that at Piu pásar, a village south of Bikáner, in
the Jodhpur territory, lived Laut, a Rájput Punwar, who had attained the
age of 60 and had no son. One day a neighbour going out to sow his
field met Laut, and deeming it a bad omen to meet & childless man,
turned back from his purpose. This cut Laut to the quick, and he
went out to the jungle and bewailed his childlessness until evening,
when a faqir appeared to him and told him that in nine months ho
should have a son, and after showing his miraculons power by drawing
milk from a call, vanished from bis sight. At the time named a child
miraculously appeared in Laut's house, and was miraculously suckled
by his wife Hánsá.This happened in Sambat 1508 (A.D. 1451).
For seven years the boy, wbo was an incarnation (autár) of Vishnu,
played with bis fellows, and then for 27 years he tended cattle, but all
this time he spoke no word. His miraculous powers were shown in
various ways, such as producing sweets from nothing for the delectation
of his companions, and he became known as Achamba (the Wonder),
whence his name of Jhámba, by wbich he is generally known. After
34 years, a Brahman was sent for to get him to speak and on bis
confessing his failure Jhámbají again showed his power by lighting a
lamp by simply snapping his fingers, and uttered his first word. Ho
then adopted the life of a teacher, and went to reside on a sandbill,
some thirty miles south of Bikáner, where after 51 years he died and
was buried, instead of being burnt, like an ordinary Hindu.
Another account of Jhambají says that
* When a lad of five he used to take bis father's herds to water at
the well, and had for each head of cattle a peculiar whistle ; the cows
and bullocks would come one by one to the well, drink and go away.
One day a man named Udaji happened to witness this scene, and,
struck with astonishment, attempted to follow the boy when he left the
well. He was on horseback and the boy on foot, but gallop as fast
as he would he could not keep up with the walking pace of the boy.
At last, in amazement, he dismounted and threw himself at his feet.
The boy at once welcomed him by name, though he then saw him for
the first time. The bewildered údaji exclaimed Jhámbaji (omni-
Pronounced Visbpoi in Babáwalpur and Bikáner.
According to the Hisoár Settlement Report bis parents woro Lohut and Kesar,



Bishnai tenata.
111
scient), and henceforth the boy was known by this name. On attaining
manhood, Jbámbají left his home, and, becoming a faqir or religious
mendicant, is said to have remained seated upon & sandhill called
Samrathal in Bíkáner, for a space of 51 years. In 1485 a fearful famine
desolated the country, and Jhámbají gained an enormous number of
disciples by providing food for all that would declare their belief in him.
He is said to have died on his gandhill, at the good old age of 84, and
to have been buried at a spot about a mile distant from it.”
A further account says that his body remained suspended for six
months in the pinjra without decomposing.
The name Bishnoi is of course connected with that of Vishnú, the
deity to whom the Bishnois give most prominence in their creed,
though sometimes they themselves derive it from the 29 (bis-nauj
articles of faith inculcated by their founder. In fact it was very
difficult in our returos to distinguish the Bishnoi from the Vaishnav
who was often entered as a Baishnav or Bishno. The Bishnois some-
times call themselves Prahládbansís or Prahládpanthís,* on the ground
that it was to please Prahlád-bhagat that Vishnu became incarnate in
the person of Jhámbají. The legend is that 33 crores of beings were
born along with Prahlád and five crores of them were killed by the
wicked Hirnákash, and when Vishnu, as the Narsingh avatar, saved the
life of Prahlád and asked Prahlad to name his dearest wish, the latter
requested that Vishnu would effect the salvation (mukt) of the remain-
ing 28 crores. To do this required a further incarnation, and Jhámbají
was the result.
Tenets of the Bishnois. Regarding the doctrines of the sect, Sir
James Wilson,t from whom I have already quoted, writes :-
“ The sayings (sabd) of Jhámbají to the number of 120 were written
down by his disciples, and have been handed down in a book (pothi)
written in the Nágri character and in a dialect similar to Bágri,
seemingly a Marwari dialect. The 29 precepts given by him for the
guidance of his followers are as follows:-
Tás din sútuk- pánch roz ratwanti nárá
Será karo shnán-sil-santokh --suchh pyári
Páni-báni-idhni --itná lijyo chhán,
Dayá-dharm hirde dharo-garu batár ján
Chorimnindya--jhúth-barjya bad na kariyo koe
Amal-tamákú - bhang-lil dúr hi tyágo
Mad más se dekhke dúr hí bhágo.
Amar Takhao that_bal tan mà báo
Amáshya barat--rúnkh lilo ná gháo.
Hom jap samadh pája-básh baikunthi páo.
Untis dharm kí ákhri garu batás soe
Páhal doe par chávya jisko nám Bishnoi hoe,
which is tbus interpreted :-“For 30 days after child-birth and five
after a menstrual discharge a woman must not cook food. Bathe in
the morning. Commit not adultery. Be content. Be abstemious and
pure. Strain your drinking water. Be careful of your speech. Ex-
* Soo also under Narsinghie.
| Birsa Settlement Report, page 136.
ery. Bo contentcook food.h and five



112
Bishnei observances
amine your fuel in case any living creature be burnt with it. Show
pity to living creatures: Keep duty present to your mind as the
Teacher bade. Do not speak evil of others. Do not tell lies. Never
quarrel. Avoid opium, tobacco, bhang and blae clothing. Flee from
spirits and flesh. See that your goats are kept alive (not sold to
Musalmáns, who will kill them for food). Do not plough with bullocks.
Keep a fast on the day before the new moon. Do not cut green trees.
Sacrifice with fire. Saý prayers. Meditate. Perform worship and
attain Heaven. And the last of the 29 duties prescribed by the
Teacher Baptize your children, if you would be called a true
Bishnoi'."
Some of these precepts are not strictly obeyed; for instance,
althoagh ordinarily they allow no blue in their clothing, yet a Bishnoi,
if he is a servant of the British Government, is allowed to wear a blue
uniform ; and Bishnois do use bullocks, though most of their farming
is done with camels. They also seem to be unusually quarrelsome (in
words) and given to use bad language. But they abstain from tobacco,
drugs and spirits, and are noted for their regard for animal life, which
is such that not only will they not themselves kill any living creature,
hut they do their utmost to prevent others from doing so. Conse-
quently their villages are generally swarmiog with antelope and other
animals, and they forbid their Musalman neighbours to kill them
and try to dissuade European sportsmeu from interfering with
them. They wanted it made a condition of their settlement, that no
one should be allowed to shoot on their land, but at the same time
they asked that they might be assessed at lower rates than their
neighbours on the ground that the antelope being thus left undisturbed
do more damage to their crops; but I told them this would lossen the
merit (pun) of their good actions in protecting the animals, and they
must be treated just as the surrounding villages were. They consider
it a good deed to scatter grain to pigeons and other birds, and often
have a large number of half-tame birds about their villages. The day
before the new moon they observe as a Sabbath and fast-day, doing no
work in the fields or in the house. They bathe and pray three times a
day,--in the morning, afternoon, and in the evening-saying “ Bishno,
Bishno " instead of the ordinary Hindu “ Rám Rám." Their clothing
is the same as of other Bágrís, except that their women do not allow
the waist to be seen, and are fond of wearing black woollen clothing.
They are more particular about ceremonial purity than ordinary Hindus
are, and it is a common saying that if a Bishnoi's food is on the first of
a string of twenty camels, and a man of another caste touches the
last camel of the string, the Bishnoi would consider his food defiled
and throw it away."
The ceremony of initiation is as follows:
" A number of representative Bishnois assemble, and before them a
Bádh or Bishnoi priest, after lighting a sacrificial fire (nom) instructs the
novice in the duties of the faith. He then takes some water in a new
earthen vessel, over which he prays in a set form (Bishno gayatri),
stirring it the while with his string of beads (nálá), and after asking
the consent of the assembled Bishnois, he pours the water three times
into the hands of the novice, who drinks it off. The novice's scalp



Bishnoi rites.
118
look (chata) is then cut off and his head shaved, for the Bishnois shave
the whole head and do not leave a scalp-lock like the Hindus; but they
allow the beard to grow, only shaving the chin on the father's death.
Infant baptism is also practised, and 30 days after birth the child,
whether boy or girl, is baptised by the priest (sádh) in much the same
way as an adult; only the set form of prayer is different (garbh-
gayatri), and the priest pours a few drops of water into the child's
mouth, and gives the child's relatives each three handfuls of the con-
secrated water to drink; at the same time the barber clips off the
child's hair. This baptismal ceremony also has the effect of purifying
the house which has been made impure by the birth (sutak).* .
The Bishnois intermarry among themselves only, and by a ceremony
of their own in which it seems the circumambulation of the sacred fire,
which is the binding ceremony among the Hindus generally, is omitted.
They do not revere Brahmans,t but have priests (sádhs) of their own,
chosen from among the laity. They do not burn their dead, but bury
them below the cattle-stall or in a place frequented by cattle, such as a
cattle-pen. They observe the Holi in a different way from other Hindus.
After sunset on that day they fast till the next forenoon, wben, after
hearing read the account of how Prahlad was tortured by his infidel
father Harnákash for believing in the god Vishnu, until he was deliver-
ed by the god himself in his incarnation of the Lion-man, and mourning
over Prahlád's sufferings, they light a sacrificial fire and partake of
consecrated water, and after distributing unpurified sugar (gur) in
commemoration of Prahlad's delivery from the fire into which he was
thrown, they break their fast. Bishnois go on pilgrimage where
Jhámbají is buried, south of Bíkáner, where there is a tomb (mat) over
his remains and a temple (mandir) with regular attendants (pújárí).
A festival takes place here every six months, in Asauj and Phágan,
when the pilgrims go to the sandhill on which Jhán bají lived, and
there light sacrificial fires (hom) of jandi wood in vessels of stone, and
offer a burnt offering of barley, til, ghi and sugar, at the same
time muttering set prayers. They also make presents to the attendants
of the temple, and distribute moth and other grain for the peacocks
and pigeons, which live there in numbers. Should any one have
committed an offence, such as having killed an animal, or sold a cow
or goat to a Musalmán, or allowed an animal to be killed when he
could have prevented it, he is fined by the assembled Bishnois for the
good of the temple and the animals kept there. Another place of
pilgrimage is a tomb called Chhambola in the Jodhpur country, where
a festival is held once a year in Chet. There the pilgrims bathe in
the tank and help to deepen it, and sing and play musical instruments
and scatter grain to peacocks and pigeons.”
The Bishnois look with special attention to the sacred hom or sacrifice;
it is only the rich who can perform this daily ; the poor meet tugether
Bover Prabled waterf'Prahlade fast.net, wheregular a Asanj 3 lived, and
tiheimbají is and a temple here ever hil on which vessels of the sam
* But according to the Hissar Settlement Report, the ceremony of admission to the sect is
as follows:- The priests and the people assemble together, repeat the pahul.mantar over a
cup of water, and give it to the candidate to drink; who thereafter goes round the assembly
and bows to all. His head is then shaved after the manner of the founder of the sect.
According to his means he has to pay a certain sum of money (Rs. 5 to 500 is the limit), for
the purpose of buying gram, which is then sent to the Samrathal sandbill in order to feed
pigeons,
+ But in Fazilka the Bishnois are said to employ Brahmans for religious as well as
secuilar purposes.



114
Bochah-Bodla.
to carry out the rite on the Amávas day only. The gaenas or sádhs,*
who are their priests and are fed and feed. by them like Brahmans,
are a hereditary class and do not intermarry with other Bishnois,
por do they take offerings from any but Bishnois, The Bishnois
themselves are a real caste and were shown as such in tbe Census
tables ; and the returns of the caste are much more to be relied on than
those of the sect, for the reason given above, that many Bishnois by
sect must have been shown as Vaishnavas, and vice versâ. It is said
that a member of any of the higher Hindu castes may become a Bishnoi,
but as a matter of fact they are almost entirely Játs or Khátís (carpen-
ters) or, less frequently, Rájputs or Bánias, and the Bánia Bishnois are
apparently not found in the Punjab, their chief seat being Murádábád,
in the United Provinces. The man who becomes a Bishnoi is still
bound by his caste restrictions ; he no longer calls himself a Ját, but
he can marry only Ját Bishnois, or he is no longer & Khátí, and yet
cannot marry any one who is not a Khátí; and further than this, the
Bishnoi retains the got of his original tribe and may not marry within
it.t Karewa is practised among them, but an elder brother cannot
marry a younger brother's widow, though her brother-in-law or father-
in-law are entitled, if she do not marry her dewar, to a payment called
bhar from her second husband.
There is not perhaps very much in the teaching of Jhámbají to
distinguish him from the orthodox pattern of Hindu saints, and in some
points his doctrine, more especially with regard to the preservation of
life, is only an intensification of the ordinary VAISHNAVA tenets. But
in the omission of the phera at marriage, the cutting off of the chotí or
scalp-lock, the special ceremony of initiation, and the disregard for
the Brahmanicul priesthood, we find indications of the same spirit as
that which moved the other Hindu reformers of the period.
BOCHAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) in Multán.
BODLA.---The Bodlás are a small section of the Wattu Rajputs I of the
lower and middle Sutlej, who have for some generations enjoyed a
character for peculiar sanctity, s and who now claim Qureshi origin
from Abu Bakr Sadiq; and many of them call themselves Qureshis.
They still marry Wațţu girls, though they give their daughters only to
Bodlás. They were till lately a wholly pastoral tribe, and still hold
a jágír, the proceeds of which they now supplement by zultivation.
They came up from Multán through Baháwalpur to Montgomery, where
they were described by Purser as "lazy, silly, and conceited.” From
Montgomery they spread into Sirsa, where they occupied the Bahak
pargana which they still hold. They are credited with the power of
curing disease by exorcism, and especially snake-bite and hydrophobia ;
they are recognised saints, and can curse with great efficacy. They
have no relations with the other Qureshis of the neighbourhood, and
* According to the Hissár Settlement Report the sádhs are priests and the thapun
are secular clergy, generally elected by the people. Priesthood is not hereditary. In Fázilká
it is said that Bishnois never employ a Brahman if a Bhát is available. The Bhát too is a
Bishnoi,
• + In Fázilka the Bishnois are said to have 360 divisions : one named Rojá, meaning nilgai,
but no reverence is paid to that animal by the Rojás. Cf. Goráya.
I No Waţtu would claim affinity with the Bodlás, who are held in great respect in Bíkáner,
as Parmeshwar ro sakko ro sakko, i.e., 'Kin of God's kith and kin.' The use of Parmeshwar
for Alláh points to a Hindu origin.".
§ Bodla in Western Punjábi means 'simpleton', and simplicity or lunacy is regarded as
asign of sanctity in the Easte



Bohrá-Boné.
115
their Watçu originis fiereby open to question, though they may
possibly be of Qureshi extraction, but now so completely affiliated to
the Wațţus by constantly taking brides from that tribe as to be undis.
tinguishable from them. Their power of curing snake-bites is con-
nected with a historical fact. When the Prophet and his companion
Abu Bakar left Mecca, they concealed themselves in a cavern, and
there the devoted companion, in order to protect his master, tore his
turban into rags and closed the holes with the pieces. One hole he
stopped with his toe, and it was bitten by a snake. When the Prophet
learnt what had occurred he cured it by sucking the wound, and the
Sadiqís sometimes seek to prove their descent from the first Caliph
by claiming the power of curing snake-bite. There is also said to be
a class of wondering gharishti faqirs called Bodlá. A Saniási sub-sect
also appears to bear this name. Possibly the word is confused with
Bhola, 'simple', an epithet of Mahadev. See also QURESHI.
BOHRÁ.--The Bobrá includes two distinct classes : one Brahman money-
lenders from Márwár, who havə settled in the districts on the Jumna,
and acquired a most unenviable notoriety for unscrupulous rapacity.
There is a rustic proverb : Bore kú Rám Rám aisá Jam ka saridesá :
“A Bohrá's good morning!' is like a message from the angel of
deathi." These Bohrás appear to accept brides from Bániás, but do
not give them daughters.
In the hills any money-lender or shop-keeper is apparently called a
bohrá (from the same root as beohár 'trade'*, and the word is used
in the same general sense in the south of Rájputána and in Bombay,
taking the place of the 'Bánia' of Hindustán, though in Gúzerat it is
specially applied to a class of Shía traders who were converted to
Islám about 1300 A. D. [For the Muhammadan Bora see Wilson's Sects
of the Hindus, p. 170. They are represented in Multán.] In the Punjab
all the Bohrás are Hindus. In those Hill Siates in which Behras are
numerous, Bániás are hardly represented in the returns, and vice versa ;
and both the Bánia and Bohra are in the hills also known as Mahájan
The Hill Bohrás are said to be exceedingly strict Hindus, and to be
admitted to intermarriage with the lower classes of Rajputs, such as
Ráthis and Rawats. In Gurdáspur there is said to be a small class
of-traders called Bohrás who claim Ját origin, and who are notorious for
making money by marrying their daughters, securing the dower, and
then running away with both, to begin again da capo.
BOJAK, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BOKHA, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery : also called Bokhe
and found as cultivators and camel-breeders in Baháwalpur.
Bolá, a Ját clan (agricultural) fouud in Multán.
Bomí, a Rájput sept, according to the Punjabi Dicty., p. 166.
Bonar, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BoŅ, Boạá, fem. Bonáí, a weaver of the Chamár caste.
* Beames gives wuhuru as the true form of the word. Wohra is a gol or se: :tion of the
Muhammadan Khojas. It is fairly clear that the Bohras are connected in some way with the
Khojás. ln Hewar there are Muhammadan Bihoras as well as Bora Brahmans The
former are united under elected mullühs and are said to be Hassanis by sect. cf. Malcolm'e
Arst, of Persia I, p. 395. Their chief colony is at Ujjain. See Memoir on Central India
and Malwa, by Malcolm, II, pp. 91-92.
, by Malcolm . Their chien cand are said to be as well as Obor some way with the



116
Bopahráe-Brahman.
BOPAHRÁB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
BOPERÁI, & Hindu Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
BOSAN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán, to the south of the Vaing.
Their ancestor is said to have been a disciple of Baháwal Hagg and
to have received from him some of the land granted to him by the
ruler of Multán. They came from Haidarábád in Sind and are also
found in Bahawalpur as landowners. The Bappis, with whom they
intermarry, and Sangis are said to be of the same stock.
Bot; an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BOȚAB, BUȚTAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Bozdár, an independent BALOCH tribe situated beyond our frontier at the
back of the Kasráni territory. They hold from the Sanghar Pass on
the north to the Khosa and ķhetrán country on the south, and have
the Lúni and Músa Khel Patháns on their western border. Those
found in Dera Ghází Khán live in scattered villages about Rájanpur
and among the Laghári tribe, and have no connection with the parent
tribe. The Bozdár are hardly of Rind extraction seeing that their
pedigree only makes them descendants of a goat-herd who married
Báno, widow of Rind's great-grandson, Shau Ali. They are divided
into the Duláni. Ladwáni Ghulámáni, a sub-tuman, Chakráni, Sihani,
Shábwáni, Jaláláni, Játiráni and Rustamáni clans. They are more
civilized than most of the trans-frontier tribes aod are of all the Baloch
the strictest Musalmáns. Unlike all other Baloch they fight with the
matchlock rather than with the sword. They are great graziers, and
their name is said to be derived from the Persian bun, a goat.
BRAHMAN, (Panjabi Bámhan, Bahman; fem. Bámhaní: dim. masc., Bamhanotá;
fém. Bamhaņoti, a Brahman's son or daughter: cf. Bambanaú, Brahman-
hood).
The Brahmans in India are divided into two great geographical
groups, the Utrahak, who live to the north of the Vindhias, and the
Dakshnat, who inhabit peninsular India to the south of that range.
The former are further divided into 5 groups, viz.-
1. Saraswat, (modernised Sársat).
2. Kankubj.
3. Gaur.
Also called, collectively, GAUR,
4. Utkal.
5. Maithal.
The southern groups* also number 5 and are : Darawar, Maharashtrí,
Sorashat, or Karnátik, Tailing and Gorjar.t Of those the only repro-
Bentative in the Punjab are the Pushkarná Brahmans, who sprang
from the Maharashtrí group.t The mass of the Punjab Brahmaps
er tribes apgh they bgraziers, and
* Also called, collectively, Darawar, from the saint of that name. Another account says
the Darawar comprise the Maharashtr, Tailing, Gurjar, Dakhshani and Indrik : (Amritsar).
. Lest it be too hastily assumed that Gorjar, Gurjar or Gujar Brahmans have any
connection with the Gúiars, folk-etymology has suggested that the name is derived from
gunjh, 'secracy, because their ancestor had once to conceal his faith.
But unlike the southern Brahmans the Pushkarnás observe ghunghat (i.e., their women
veil their faces), but they have no garbhá dhán (pregnancy rite) and in other respects their
customs are dissimilar.



19. Mut
+28.
The Pushkarnde.
117
are Sársuts, but Gauſs are found in the eastern districts of the
Province. But vertain groups of Brahmans are neither recognised as
Sársut nor as Gaur, or have become totally distinct from the Brahman
community. Such are the Pushkarnás, Muhials, described below, and
the BHOJKI, DHAKOCHI, TAGA and Tagu groups.
The PUSHKARNÁS.
It will be convenient to describe first the Pushkarnás, a comparatively
small and unimportant group found only in the south-west of the
Punjab. They are divided into two territorial groups, (i) Sindhú, “of
the Indus valley," and (ii) Márwárí, of Márwár, or Marechá.
The Pushkarpás claim to be parohits of all the 'Bhát Rájputs' who
are divided into Bháțs, Bhattís and Bbáțiás,* and are described by
Ibbetson as more strict in caste matters than the Sársut.
The Pushkarnás are divided into two groups : Sindhu and Marecha,
and are said to have 84 gots as given belowt :-
1.—SINDAÓ-
ti. Tangsali. 9Bújrú.
Hars.
125. Nangú.
12. Viás.
10. Maulo.
Chauwatia. +26.
Kallá.
+3. Mattur. $11. Gandriya.
Muttur.
+27.
Vishá.
Kapta. 12. Dháki.
20.
Munda.
Ratta.
Prohat 113, Mutta.
Parhihár.
Billá.
6. Machhar. 19. Jiwanecha.
Kandia.
+30. Wasu.
Wattú. 115. Lapishia (Lapia).
Koráit.
+31. Karádá.
| Mát A. 18. Pania.
24. Vissrá.
32. Chúrá.
II.--MAREOHÁ-
1. Kakreja. 14. Gota.
27. Kopalia. 40. Rámdev.
%. Chullar. 15. Gotma.
28. Wachhar. 41. Upádhiye.
Acháraj. 16. Thákar.
29. Mastoda. 42. Achhú.
Beda.
17. Badal.
30. Pádoya. 43. Sheshdhár.
Gajja. 18. Dodha.
31. Tojhs.
44. Vegai.
Kadar.
19. Kovasthilia
82. Vejhá.
45. Vidang.
Keerlá, 20. Kaulo.
83. Jhund.
46. Hethoshis.
Naula. 21. Jabbar.
34. Búra.
47. Somnáth.
Kewlia. 22. Dhagrá.
35. Nohoſa.
48. Singhé.
10. Teriwaſi. 23. Pedha.
36. Mumaţia. 49. Godána.
11. Sándhu. 24. Rámá.
37. Kải.
50. Khikhar.
12. Godá. 25. Waheti.
38. Karmana. 51. Khanesh.
13. Godánú.
39. Rangá. 152. Khohára.
This list is given in a book. In Mianwali only those markedt are found.
Daughters are generally given in marriage in one and the same
family, and if possible to brothers, accordin to a very wide-spread
custom.
On the other hand in Baháwalpur the Marechá are described as
pore Pusbkarnst and comprise 15 gots :
1. Acháraj.
6. Khidana.
11. Pardha.
2. Bhorá.
7Kiráru.
12. Ramde.
3. Chhanganá.
8. Kullhá.
13, Ranga.
4, Gujjá.
9. Ludhdhar.
14. Wiás.
5. Kabta,
10. Muchchan.
15. Wissa,
23.
mi sono inconico
* Incidentally this indicates that the Bhattis and Bhátiás have a common originboth
come from the country to the south of the Papjab. There are said to be Bhát Rájpats in
Jaisalmír.
† It is said that the Pushkarns used to be called Sri-Malis, that they rank below the
Bársut, Párikh and Gaur sub-castes, and are (only) regarded as Brahmans because of their
skill in astrology. But they are by origin possibly Sársuts who made Pushkar or Pokhar,
the sacred lake near Ajmer their head-quarters. One section of them is said to have been
originally Beldárs or Ods who were raised to Brahminical rank as a reward for excavating
the tank and it still worships the pickaxe, but this tradition is not now current in the
Panjab,



118
Brahmans in the South-West.
Next come the Dassá or half-breeds and lastly the Sindhu with 2
gots : Mattar and Wattú.* .
In Baháwalpurt mention is made of a sub-caste, called Párikh,
which I cannot trace elsewhere. It has 6 got8f:-
Bora.
Kathotia.
Parohit.
Joshi.
Pándia.
Tiwari.
It is distinct from the Sáwanis.
THE BRAHMANICAL HIERARCHY IN THE SOUTH-WEST PUNJAB.
Before describing the Sársut Brahmans it will be best to describe
the organisation of the Brahmanical heirarchy in the South-West
Punjab, where the Sársuts aud Pushkárnás overlap, combining to
form groups of beneficed and unbeneficed priests which are further
attached to the different castes.
The Wateshar.-The Wateshars are a group of Brahmans whose
clientèle is scattered, and who receive fixed dues from their patrons,
irrespective of the services rendered to them. If they preside at a
religious function they receive fixed fees in addition to their stand-
ing dues.
In Míánwálí the Wateshar class comprises the following sections
of the Sársut|| and Pushkarná Brahmans :-
1. Dhannanpotra ...
matan S iKandiára..
ü. Lalți.
* The Wattú got is the lowest of all: Brahmanôn mon Wattú, ghoron men tattú-“The
Wattú among Brahmans is what a pony is among horses."
† But towards Bikáner is a group known as Párik:
# The sub-divisions of these sections are variously given thus :-
( Ambruana, from Amar Náth, Pangíldásí, from “ Rangil
Bhojipotra is said to include Dás," Wajal, from Wajaljí, Tejal from Tejaljí, all four
i, ii and ii as in text and
with Rám Nand, Machbindrají and Bhara Mal, sons of
Sidh Bojh, the saint and eponym of the section.
This section also includes the Dand-dambh, the nick.name apparently of some family
earnt by curing an ox, as the name implies.
The Samapotra also in the Kalkadásani, Prayágdási, , and all six sub-divisions are
cludes i and ii, as above with | Prithwi Mal and Shámdási patronymic.
The Samapotras are descended from Sidh Saman and perform a special worship on the
Rikhipanchami, the 5th of the bright half of Bhádon. They also worship Hingláj devi at
births, weddings and on the 3rd of the bright half of Baisakh.
Sidh Bhardwaji.
The Bhardwája sub-divisions are ) Aror
Kánjar is
(Ratan
Sringi.
The Katpál are
Badha.
Takht.
The Lalfi are
Bakht.
Raj:
Jan.
For the correspondence betweea these sections and those of the Muhiál Brahmans see infra.
$ It has been suggested that Wateshar is derived from birt, 'dues. It is doubtless the same
word as Vriteswar, derived from vritti or virat, and may be translated 'beneficed.' Thus the
Wateshar form ar. occupational group and the description given of their sub-divisions is
cerlainly not absolute,
Il Among the 8ársut Watesbar the matrimonial relations are complicated. The Sethpál
marry with the Bhojípotra and Sámepotra, if such alliances have been actually made in the
past. If however they cannot obtain brides from these two sections they try to get them from
the Bhardwája or Kathpál. Again the Dhanpanpotra only take brides from sections
Nos. 2-4, but give none to them. Under these circumstances it is not surprising to learn
that the Bhojípotra and Sámepotra sections used till recently to practise female infanticide
habitually. Lastly sections Nos, 5-7 are willing to effect exchange betrothals with the
Narainis, if.no suitable match offers within this group of three sections, which intermarry,
The Pushkarná Watesbars also effect exchange betrotbals as do the Shahri and Naraimi.



Brahmans in the South-West.
119
ci. Ráma-Nanda : intermarry with the Bharoge and Maghwani.
2. Bhojípotra ... ii. Machiana
Wadhwani.
( üi. Bharojike
Maghwani }
,
3. Sámepotra
Ráma-Nanda.
ü. Wadhwani
Machiána.
4. Sethpál.
5. Bhardwaja
6. Kathpál
7. Kandiára
intermarry.
8. Lalší
11. Nangu.
Lapiya.
Parial.
Tanksali.
Sindhú Pushkarná 85. Mattar.
i 6. Gandhria.
7. Wasu.
18, Wessa.
(9. Sohana,
Of the Wateshar class each section is said to minister to certain
sections of Arosás. *
* For instance the Kathpál Brahmans minister to--
1. Gorwárá, 2. Dhingſá, 3. Dang, 4. Madán, 5. Chhábra, 6. Popli, etc.
The Lalţi minister to-
1. Gera, 2. Lulla, etc.
The Bhardwaj minister to
1. Húja, 2. Makheja, 3. Anejá, 4. Tanejá, 5, Sarejá, 6. Farejá, 7. Khandúja,
8. Dhamija, 9. Sukhíjá, 10. Nakrá, 11. Chugh, 12. Chhokrá, 13. Bathis,
14. Nángpal, 15. Maindiratta, 16. Kálrá, 17. Minocha.
The Bhojpotrá minister to-
1. Gambhír, 2, Batrá, 3. Chawla, 4. Khetarpál, 5. Gand, 6. Nárag, 7. Billa, 8, Budh-
rájá, 9. Rewari, 10. Chachrá, 11. Busri, 12. Virmáni.
The Parhihár minister to-
1. Kherá, 2. Khuráná, 3. Bhugrá, 4. Machhar.
The Nangú minister to-
1. Chikkar, 2. Sachdev, 3, Gulati, 4. Haas, 5. Kúrábhatia, 6.
The Sámepotra minister to-
1. Kathuriye, 2 Khanijan, 3. Naroole, 4. Babar, 5. Dua, 6. Wasudev, 7. Bhangar,
8. Hans, 9. Ghoghar, 10. Manglani, 11. Piplani, '12. Rihani, 13. Mandianí,
14, Jindwani, 15. Pawe, 16. Salootre, 17. Juneji, 18. Rawal, 19. Kansite Sunare,
20. Lakhbatre, 21. Bhutiani, 22. Jatwani, 23. Nandwani, 24. Rajpotre,
25. Danekhel with eleven others.
The Lapshia minister to-
1. Cháwlá, 2. Kharbanda, 3. Mongiá, 4, Khattar, 5. Kalúcha, 6. Kurşá.
The Dhannanpotra minister to
1. Dudejá, 2. Chotmurádá, etc,
The Singopotrá minister to-
1. Bajáj, etc.
The Sethpál minister to Saprá, etc.
All these are sections of the Arofás.
The Dhannanpotra minister to the Dawra, Bugga, Janji Khel, Danjri, Rohri, Madanpotre,
Dhamija, Sanduja, Uthra and other gots.
BÁRSUT
I.-Bhojípotra
Shámípotra*
intermarry (and take wives from II, III, IV and
Dhannanpotra
Satpál
V, just as II intermarry and take wives from
Lalre* .
III, IV).
Singhupotra
II.-Bhenda
Bhardwají,
Kandiari.
Kethupotra.
Káthpáli.
Shámjípotra.
* To this section belonged Lalji Gosain



120
Brahmans in the South-West.
: Of the Sindhu-Pushkarná Wateshar the Nangu minister to the
Gurmaliá, Kaura, Gulati, Sachdev, Chikkar, Mungiya and Raon-khela
and many other sections of the Aroſás, and the Sajúlia section of the
Bhátiás. The Lapiya minister to the Kharbanda, Cháwala, Mongiá,
Karre, Khattar and Kalacbe gots, and the Parial to the Khera, Bugra
and Khurana, all sections of the Aroſás. The Tanksali* minister
to the Nangpál, Mutríjá, Dua (Seth Hari); the Mattar minister to the
Khurana, all Sateja Aroſás; the Gandhria to Mahesri Banias ; the
Wasu to Bhátiás; the Wesa to Mahesri Banias and the Sohana to
Bhátiás.
The Astré have fewer patrons than the Wateshar, and the clientèle of
each is confined to one place, where he resides. If a Wateshar is
unable to officiate for a patron an Astri acts for him, receiving ths of
the fee, the balance of gths being handed over to the Wateshar.
The Astri sections in Miánwálí aro-
1. Ramdeh,t 2. Shason, 3. Bhaglal, 4. Ishwar, and 5. Dabiwál.
The Narainí is an immigrant group, and is thus without patrons, bat
if the Wateshar and Ástrí are illiterate, a literate Narainí is called
in to perform any function requiring knowledge. As a rule, however,
the Narainí only presents himself whan alms are given to all and
sundry.
Patrons.
Patrons.
1. Bambowal.
9. Lapshab ... Khathar and Dhol.
2. Brahmi. .
10. Ojha.
8. Chanana ... Gérerí.
11. Pandit.
Chandan ... Aneja Arofás.
12. Pharande.
Chuni ... Dhupar Aroſás.
13. Ramdeh ... Dhaneja Arorás.
Gaindhar... Chatkare Arofás.
14. Sobaran.
Joshi ... Nakſa..
15. Sutrak.
8. Kakrab .... Khurana and Taloja
16. Tilhan :
Aroras.
17. Wohra ... Manocha Arorás.
Only a Brahman may be an ástrí, a parohit or a thání. He may also
officiate as an Acháraj, a Bhát, a Gosáin or a Vod-pátr, (and so may any
other Hindu), but if he does so he must not accept any dues for the rites
performed. Only a Brahmau can take sankalpa, no other Hindu.
:
5.
Du
III.-Chání
Bhaglál.
Ohannan
Gangabar.
Sátrak
Rughanpotra (or Aganhotrí ?).
Kákro
Nárath.
Ramde
Sethí.
Gaindhar
Máhla
(Lapsha).
IV.Jhangan
Tikha
Mohla
Ramrie
Brahmans of Khatris.
Jetli
Bagge
Sant
V.-The Mahta Brahmans, whose sections are the Chhibbar, Dat, Mohan, Vod, Báli and
Lau, do not act as parohits, but are engaged in agriculture, trade or service. Obviously
these are the same as the Muhiáls of the North West Punjab.
* The Tanksalis are called Jhání and receive certain dues on marriage and Dharm band in
the Hadd Jaskáni, i.e., in the tract under the rule of the Jaskáni Biloches,
† Minister to the Danekhel section of the Aromas.



The Vuhiál Brahmans.
121
Brahman'her-in-law, to thom performpurely a meitled to res
A Brahman's own religious observances are performed by his
daughter's father-in-law, or by sume relative of the latter, though he
may, in their absence, get them performed by any other Brahman. A
sister's son is also employed. This is purely a matter of convenience,
the relations of a daughter's husband being entitled to receive gifts,
hut not those of a son's wife.
TAE SECULAR BRAHMANS.
The Muhiál Brahmans. This group of secular Brahmans is said to
derive its name from muhin, a sum of money given by them at
weddings to Bháțs and Jájaks, varying from Rs. 5 to Rs, 7 or Rs. 12.
The Muhiáls are also styled Munháls, and are said to be so called from
muhin, a sept. But it is also suggested that the name is derived from
mukhia, spokesman,' or principal.' By origin the Muhiáls are cer-
tainly Sársuts and still take wives from that group in Gujrát, while in
Rawalpindi the five superior sections (Sudhán, Sikhan, Bhaklál, Bhog
and Káli) of the Banjáni Sársuts used to give daughters to the Bhimwal
(Bhibhál) 'Muhiál Sársuts' and occasionally to the other Muhiál
sections, though they refused them to the inferior sections of the
Bunjáhis: Rawalpindi Gr. 1883-84, p. 51.
Their organisation is on the usual principles and may be thus
tabulated :
GROUP I.-BÁRI.
Section.
1. Chhibbar,
S
Datt ...
Mohan.
Ved or Baid....
Bali ... ...
i. Dablijiya.
ii. iim or common.
....
Setpál (Sáhanpál).
... Dhannanpotrá
...
...
..
...
...
...
...
...
.... Bhojipotrá.
.. Lálſi,
GROUP II.--BUNJÁRI,
•
•
•
•
•
Simepotrá.
Lâu • •
Bibhowál or Bhibhál.
The Bári group either intermarries or takes daughters from the
Bunjáhi, but the two sections of the latter (Lau and Bibhowal)
can only marry inter se.*
* The Bháts eulogise the Muhiáls in the following verses :-
Datt dátá, Lau mangtá,
"The Datts are generous, and the Lau beggars,
Cnhibbar wich Sardár.
• The Chhibbars are Sardárs.
Waidán háth katáriyán,
The Baids dagger in hand
Chalde pabán de bhár.
Walk full of pride.
Bibho kháte bimb phal,
The Bibho (Bibhowál) eat bimb phal (a fruivi,
Mohan Báli chakdár.
Mohan and Báli are chakdárs.
There are further sub-divisions, but among the Waid the Samba, among the Datt the
Kanjruria, among the Báli the Khará and among the Chhibbar the Barra, are considered
superior clans.



122
The Sársut Brahmans.
The following table illustrates the origin of the Muhiál sections and
sub-sections:--
MUHIÁLS.
Chhibbar.
Baid.
Lau.
Datt.
Báli.
Sidh súhán. Sidh Bhoj. Sidh Sám.
Sidh Chár.
(Name of Sidh
not known).
Setpál (Bári). Bhojopotre. Shámepotre.
Kali Dhíru.
Chand.
Dhanan. Lálfi Takht
Medho Dám, Rámá Nand.
Dhiropotre | (Banjáhi). Lálfi
Kundiare (Bunj.hi).
(Bári).
Machbáne. Rámá Nandune, (Banjáhi).
Dhapanpotre (Bári).
(b).
Amrá.
wale
Bheru. Bábe. Dand.
wale waleDumbh,
Chudiwál
(Rári).
Tulambiya,
(Bári).
.
(d).
Sit-paria,
(Bunjábi).
Prithwi Mal. Wadhu Rám. Manghú Rám. Kálká Dás.
Prithwi Maláne. Wadhwani. Mangwáni. Kálká Dásáni.
The descendants of the five Sidhs are further sub-divided into pánchtolias
(who give their daughters not less than 5 tolas of gold as dowry) and
tritoliyas (who give not less than 3). The latter rank below the former.
The origin of the Muhiáls is thus described : In Sambat 200
Vikrami the five Sidh, went to the Naunútbi Hill and there practised
asceticism. About that time too the Khatrís of the Aror family
(now the Aroſás) and the other Khatris fell out, so the latter separated
from the Aroſás and became jajmáns of the Sidhs. The Muhiáls
who did not attach themselves to the Arorás refused to accept alms
(dán) and are still purely secular. They are found chiefly if not
exclusively in Rawalpindi (where many are Sikhs) ; in Jhelum and
Sháhpur as land holders or io service. All Muhiáls may marry girls of
Brahman families which are not Muhiál.
A small group of secular Brahmans found at Hariána, in
Hoshiarpur is the Kauchan Kawal. They are also called Suraj Duaj
(Sun-worshippers). Their ancestor came from Delhi as a kánúngo
to Hariána, whence they are also called Kánúngos. They can marry
in the nánká's got, avoiding only the father's got. They do not take
charity (dán), and either take service or engage in trade or cultivation. -
If any one of them takes alms he is outcasted and they do not
intermarry with him.
Other purely lay groups of Brahmans are : the DBAKOCHI of the
Dhúnd and Karrál Hills in Hazára, who are also called Mahájane: the
TAGAs of Karnál, who are Gauss by origin and agriculturists by avoca.
tion: and the criminal Tabús of the same District.
THE SARSUT BRAHMANS.
The Sársut is essentially the Brahman of the Punjab, just as the Khatri
is distinctively a Punjab caste. The Sársut, as a body, minister to all
the Hindu castes, possibly even to those which are unclean and so stand
outsido the pale of Hinduism. Uoon this fact is based the leading



Brahmans of the Bhatrás.
123
priuciple of their organization, which is that the status of each section
depends on the status of the caste to which it ministers. In accordance
vith this prisciple, we may tentatively classify the Sársut thus :-
Sub-group 2.--Brahmans of Brahmans, called Shukla.
Sub-group iï.---Brahmans of the Khatrís-
1 Palich-záti. l 4. Bunjáhís. 1 5. Khokharán.*
2. Chhe-záti. i 3. Asth-bans. | 6. Sarín.
Sub-group iii. - Brahmans of Arorás.
Sub-group iv.-Brahmans of Jáțs.
Sub-group v.-Brahmans of inferior castes, e.g., the Chamarwá.
Further, each of the sub-groups is divided into grades on the analogy
of the Khatri caste system thus
1. Panchzáti.
3. Bunjábi.
2. Bári.
4. Inferior zátis.
Thus we may take the Shuklař Brahmans to comprise the following
gots :-
Gallia
Jetli.
Malia
Jhingan.
Panchzáti
...
Kapuria
for Mohla.
Bhaturia
Kumaria.
Trikha.
The Sársut Brahmans of the Khatrés. The connection of the Khatri
with the Sársut Brahman caste is peculiarly close. One tradition of its
origin avers that when Parasu Ráma was exterminating the Kshatriyas
a pregnant woman of the caste took refuge with a Sársut. When her
child, a son, was born, the Sársut invested him with the janeo and
taoght him the Vedas. Hence the Sársuts are invariably the parohits
of the Khatrís, and from this incident arose the custom which allows
parohit and jajman to eat together.
The boy married 18 Kshatriya girls and his sons took the names of the
various rishis and thus founded the gotras of the Khatris, which are the
same as those of the Brahmans. This legend explains many points in
the organization of the Sársut Brahmans in the Punjab, though it is
doubtless entirely mythical, having been intended to account for the close
dependence of the Brahmads of the Sársut branch on the Khatri caste.
Group 1.-Panjzáti i. At the top of the social tree stand five sections,
which are the parohits of the Dháígbar
1. Mohla. )
2. Jetli.
Khatrís. This group is known as the
3. Jhingan. Group Panjzáti or Panjzáti or 'five sections, and also as
Pachháda. Pachhada or 'western.' If the Brah-
5. Kumaria. J
mans followed the Khatri organization
in all its complexity we should expect to find these sections constituting
the Dhaighar sub-group of a Bári group, and they are, it would seem,
called Dhăíghar-Lahoria, at least in Lahore.
There are also said to be two groups, each of 5 zâtis, which once formed
themselves into endogamous cliques. These were:(0) Kalia, Malia, Bhaturia,
* Probably this is correct. The Muhiál having ceased to be Brahmans at all, no longer
minister to the Khokharán-Khatrís and so a special group of Khokharán.Brahmans has had
to be formed..
+ The Shuklas are beggars, who come from the east, from the direction of the United
Provinced They heg only from Brahmans, but are not their parohits. They are quite
distinct from the Shukal of the Simla Hills,
4.
Trikha.



124
Brahmans of the Khatris.
Kapuria and Baggas, and (iir Jhingan*, Trikbat, Jetlit, Kumhriag, and
Punbu. The last-named got was, however, replaced by the Mohlas fi, bo-
cause one of its members was discourteous to his daughter-ju-law's people.
The Bári group further, in addition to the Panchzátis, comprises the
following 7 gots : Paumbu, Gangáhar,** Martha, Sethi Charávauſ,
Pbiranda and Purang.
Group II.-Bunjáhi. This group contains several sub-groups whose
relations to one another are obscure, and indeed the subject of con-
troversy. They may be classified, tentatively, as follows:
Sub-group i.-Asht-bans, with the following eight sections :-
In Amritsar :
o r it. Karnál :
and in Patiálá.
1. Saud.
1. Sand.
1. Savd.
Sbori.
2. Pátak.
2. Suri.
3. Pátak.
3. Josbi Mabrur.
3. Pátak.
4. Mabrur.
4, Joshi Malmai.
4. Joshi Malmai.
5. Joshi.
5. Tiwapi.
5. Joshi Mahrur.
6. Tiwari.
6. Kural.
6. Tiwari.tt
7. Kural.
7. Regno.
7. Kural.
8. Bhardwaji.
8. Ratn Bhardwaj.
Sub-group ii. -Bára-ghar or Bára-záti (also called Bári) :-
1. Sarad.
7. Madao.
In Hazára-Vajra.
Sang.
2. Bb: jot.
8. Bhambi.
Vardeo. Sudan.
3. Airi.
9. Lakban Pal.
Paonde. Majju.
4. Kalie.it
10. Patti.
Bhog. dem.
5. Parbhakka, 11. Jalpat.
lebar. Dhammi,
6. Nabh
12. Sabjpal.
Ramdeo. Tara.
* Jbingan is said to be derived from jhinga or jhanjh, a bell, because the sound of a bell
was heard at its eponym's birth. This got is supposed to be only 20 generations old.
It has three sub-sections, Gautam, Athu and Nathu. Further, Nathu's descendants are sub•
divided into the less known sub-divisions of Chamnapati and Kanwlapati. The Jhingans
gotra is Bhardwaj ; their purvuras Bhrigu, Bharjan and Bhardwaj, their shákhá Madhunjan
and the Rig Veda their veda. At Dipálpur at the house of an ancestor, Babá Chhajjil, they
hold a fair in Mágh, at wbich the chila, jhand, janeo and other rites are performed. Nathu's
descendants all wear a nath in the nose.
+ Trikha's gotra is Parashar and it is sub-divided into the Palwarda, Aura and Dwija
sub-sections.
# The Jetli gotra is Vatsa, and its sub-sections are Vialepotra, Chandipotra, and Rúpe.
potra-all eponymous. The two former are replaced by Hatbila and Harppotra, according
to another account. The Mibrotra Khatris make them offerings on the 12th of the light
balf of each lunar month.
§ Tbo Kumbria gotra is also Vatsa and they too have three sub-sections.
'll Apparently the same as the Paumbu, below.
T'lbe Mohlas gotra is Somastam, and its sub-sections are Dalwali, Shiv-Nandi and Akáshi.
** Of the Vasisht gotra, They have five sub-sections, Veda Vyás, Gadgábar (sic),
Gosain, Saraph, and Gangawasbi, so-called because they used to lead bands of
pilgrims to the Ganges. They were exempt from tolls under former governments.
Tbe Sarapb (Sarráf) were bankers. The Gosains bad many jajmáns and the Veda
Vyás were learned in the Vedas. 'The Gangábars still perform their jhand or tonsure rito
near the ruins of old Jhang, near which town they possessed a pumber of wells, each
inscribed with their names.
tt Or Tawaria. At marriage they do not let the bride go to her father in law's house,
but sond instead a big gur cake wrapped in red cloth. If however the mukláwá ceremony is
performed at the same time as the wedding, they let the bride go also, otherwise they send!
her afterwards when ber muklává is given.
II Probably the same as the Bhabakkar, a got pamed after a Kishi. Its members make
a boy don the janeo (sacred thread) in his 8th year. Clad as a sádhu in a faqir's dress with
the alfi or chola, the inirg.chhála (deer.skin) and kachkul (a wallet, for collecting alms) ho
begs from door to door and is then bidden to go to the forest, but his sister brings him
back.



Brahmans of the Khatris.
125
The Zát-wale :-
Sub-group iii.-Panj-záti ii. About 116 years ago the Brahmaps
of the five sections below used to give their daughters in marriage to
the Dháighar-Lahoria Brabmans:
(1) Kalie.
(3) Kapurie.
(5) Bagge.
(2) Malie,
(4) Bhaturie.
When their daughters' began to be treated harshly in the bouses of
their fathers-in-law, these Brahmans (panjzát or five sections) arranged
to contract marriages only among themselves and ceased to form re-
lationships with the Dháighar-Lahoria.
Sub-group iv. -Chhezát-wálá.—Similarly several other sections of
Brahmans gave up giving daughters to the Dbáíghar-Lahoria Brah-
maus, such as -
(1) Pandit.
(3) Dhonde.
(5) Dhan Kaji.
(2) Pátak.
(4) Gadbari.
(6) Chbukari.
Sub-group v.-Panchzát-wále iii-
(1) Chuni,
(3) Lamb,
(5) Sarballie.
(2) Rabri.
(4) Neale.
Sub-group vi.-Sat-zatim
(1) Sajre.
(4) Neasi.
(6) Sardal.
(2) Punj.
(5) Chuni.
(7) Anni,
(3) Bandu.
The above four sub-groups are called collectively Zát-wále,
Sub-group vii.-This comprises the remaining Bunjáhi sections.
The Zát-wále stand higher than this last sub-group vii, in that
they do not accept offerings from, or eat in the houses of, Náis,
Kaláls, Kumhárs or Chhímbas, whereas the latter do both. Moreover,
the Asht-hans and Chhe-záti sub-groups claim to be superior in statas
to the Bárís, but some families of these two sub-groups stooped to
give daughters to the latter sub-group, and were, therefore, excom-
municated by the remaining families of the Asht-bans•and Chbe-záti
sub-groups, so that they lost status and formed a new sub-group called
Bans-puj. This sub-group now gives'daughters to the Asht-båns and
Chhe-záti sub-groups, but takes its wives, it is alleged, from the Bárís.
Thus the Brahman organization reflects the main outlines of the
Khatri scheme, but, though on many points of detail our information
is incomplete, it is certain that local conditions modify the organiza-
tion. For instance in Bahawalpur the Khatrís are few, while the
Aroſás are numerous and influential, so that we find the following
scheme :-
Sub-group 1.-Five sections, Mohla, Jetli, Jhingran, Tríkha,
Kumaria.
Hypergamous sub-group ii.--Five sections, Dhaman-potra, Sama-
potra, Bhoja-potra, Setpal, Takht-Lalhári ; and
Hypergamous sub-group iii.-Seven sections, Lalhári, Biás, Kandaria,
Kathpála, Shangru-potrā or Wed, Malakpura, and Bhenda.
Of these three sub-groups, the five sections of the first are Brah-
mans of the Khatrís generally, not of the Dháighar-Bári Khatrie
exclusively, while sub-groups ii and iii are Brahmans of the Aroſás
in that part of the Punjab.



126
Brahmans of the Khatris.
The ages of mom 4-8 and that possible to lay rothal and marriage
The rules of marriage.--Like the Khatrís, the Bunjábi Branmans
profess to follow the usual 'four-got' rule in marriage, but, precisely
like the Dháíghar Khatrís, the Zát-wále Brabmans avoid only their
own section and the mother's relations. At least this appears to
be the usual rule, but it would be rash to say it is an invariable
one. For example, the Bans-puj are an exception. The Asht-bans
obtain wives from them, but if a father has taken a Baps-puj wife,
the son may pot: he must marry an Asht-bans or lose status. Tbat
is to say, tbe Asht-bans may only stoop to inter-marriage with the
Bans-puj in alternate generations.
Similarly the 'four-got'rule is relaxed in other cases. Thus the
Kancban-Kamal section of Hoshiarpnr are also called Suraj Doaj.
(Sun-worshippers). Their ancestor came from Delhi as a gánúngo
at Hariána ; hence they are called Qánúngos. These Brahmans can
marry in the nánka got, avoiding only the father's got. They do not
take any dán (charity, and may either take service or engage in trade
or cultivation. If any one of them takes to receiving charity, he is
considered an outcast and they do not intermarry with him.
The ages of marriage.- Among the Bunjáhi Brahmans the age of
betrothal is from 4-8 and that of marriage from 8-12 years in
Rawalpindi. It is, bowever, impossible to lay down any universal
rules, as, generally speaking, the ages of betrothal and marriage
depend upon the status of each family witbin the group, as is the
case among the Khatrís.
The rerolt ayainst hypergamy.-It will be seen how the lower sub-
groups of the KBATRIS bave endeavoured to shake off the yoke of the
higher in matrimonial matters. A similar revolt against the position
of the Dháíghar occurred amongst the Sársut Brahmans. About 116
years ago, says the account received from Amritsar, the Lahoria
Dháíghar used to take daughters from the Panj-zát ii; but owing to
the ill-treatment meted out to the girls by the Dháíghar, they resolv-
ed to discontinue the custom, and the three other groups of the Zát-
wale followed suit while the remaining Bunjáhís continued to give
wives to the Zát-wale, but no longer received them in return. The
result was that the Bunjáhís could not obtain wives and many fami-
lies died out, so it was resolved by the Bunjahís tbat they should for
the future break off all connection with the Zát-wale, unless any of the
latter should agree to give them daughters in return. This was prior to
Sambat 1932 when a second meeting at Amritsar renewed the compact.
It may be worth noting that in both castes the proceedings of
these conferences were conducted in a formal manner, written agree-
meots being drawn up, and the families which agreed to the de-
mands put forward being entered in a register from time to time.
The territorial groups.-Like the Khatrís the Brahmans have terri-
torial groups, but these groups do not usually correspond with the
territorial groups of the former. For instance, the Brahmans of the
Murree Hills are divided into two sub-castes-Pahária and Dhakochi,
who do not intermarry or eat together. The Dugri Brahmaos corre-
spond to the Dugri Khatrís of the Sialkoţ sub-montane, but they are
said, on the one hand, to give daughters to the Sársut; and. on the



The Brahmans of Kangra..
127
other hand, to intermarry with the Batebru group of Brahmaps in
Kángra. Allusions have been already made to the Pachbáda and' to
the Lahoria, terms which seem to be applied exclusively to the five
highest sections who serve the Dbáíghar Khatrís.
THE SÂRSUT BRAHMANS OF THE AROĶÁS.
The grouping of the Brabmaps of the Aroſás has already been dos-
cribed in dealing with the Wateshars' system, and they further are said
to be thus divided :
(Bhojapotra.
Sitpál.
Panch.zati ... Shamapotra.
Takht Lalți.*
( Dhannan potra.
: The Panchzátis, together with the-
16. Puchbrat.
10. Bhardwaji.
Bári ... ... 7. Shingupotra.
11. Kathpála.t
18. Malakpura.
12. Kandhiára.
9. Khetapotra.
But the most interesting territorial group of the Sársut is that of
the Kángra Brahmans whose organization shows no traces of the
Khatri scheme, but reflects that of the Hindu Rájputs of Kángļa, and
which will, therefore, be described at some length.
TAE BRAHMANS OF KÁngra.
The Sársut des or jurisdiction extends from the Saraswati river in
Kurukshetr to Attock on the Indus and is bounded by Pehowa on the
east, by Ratia and Fatehábád in Hissar, by Multán on the south-west,
and by Jammu and Nurpur, in Kángra, on the north.
Thus the Brahmans of Kángra, who are or claim to be Sársut by
origin, stand beyond the pale of the Sársut organisation, but they
have a very interesting organisation of their own.
We find the following groups :-
i.-Nagarkoţia.
.. ii.--Batehru.
iji.--Halbaha, or cultivating.
Group 1.-The Nagarkoția are the Brahmans of the Katoch, the
highest of the Rájputs, and they were divided by Dharm Chand, the
Katoch Rájá of Kángra, into 13 functional sub-groups, each named
ft er the duties it performed in his time. These are-
i.-Dichhit, the Gurús of the Katoch, who used to teach the Gáyatri
mantra.
ii.-Sarotari, said to be from Sanskrit saro ladh. Their duty was
to pour ahoti or offerings of ghi, eto., into the hawan kund
when a jag was performed. They had learnt two Vedas.
iii.- Achária, who performed the jag.
* The Lalți have five sub-sections :-Lál Lalfi, Viás Lalſi, Takbt Lalți, Ghaniyal
Lalți and Raj Bukht or Jan.
+ By gotra Bhámundal, the Kathpálas have four sub-sections, Surangu, Sidha, Gilkála
and Pathak.



128
The Brahmans of Kángra.
1V.-Upadhyaya, or Upadhi,* or readers of the Vedas at the jag.
V.-Awasthi, those who stood by' the kalas or pitcher at the Muni.
pursh, and who received the pitcher and otber articles (of
sacrifice).
vi.--Bedbirch, who made the bedi, or square demarcated by four
sticks in which the kalas was placed.
vii.- Nág Pundrik, whose duty it was to write the prescribed in-
scriptions on the hawan kund.
viii.- Panchkarn or secular Brahmans engaged in service on the
Rájás. They performed five out of the six duties of Brah.
mans, but not the sixth, wbich is the receiving of alms.
ix.-Parohits, who were admitted to the seraglio of the Rájá and
were bis most loyal adherents.
X.-Kashmiri Pandit, literate Brahmans from Kashmír, who are
found all over the Punjab
xi.-Misr,ť said to mean'mixed,' also Kashmiri immigrants, who had
preserved their own customs and rites, but had intermarried
with the Nagarkotia. .
xii.-Raina, who helped the rulers by their incantations, in time of
war. (Said to be from ran, battle-field.)
xüi.Bip (Bipr), now extinct in Kángļa. These were parohits of
the Nagarkoţia and of some of the Batebru..
Of these 13 sub-groups numbers x and ai seem to be territorial
rather than functional. One cannot say what their relative rank
is or was. The first six are also called the six Achárias and were
probably temple priests or menials of inferior status. The Bip pro-
bably ranked high, and the Raina, or magic men, were possibly 'the
lowest of all. The Khappari are also said to be found ia Káugra, bat,
no account from that District alludes to them.
Group II.-Batehru. There are two sub-groups.
1.-Pakká Batehru.-With 9 sections-
(1) Dind, (2) Dohru, (3) Sintu, (4) Pallialu, (5) Panbar,
(6) Rukkhe, (7) Nag-Kharappe, (8) Awasthi-Cheta and
(9) Misr-Kathu.
* Bat apadhi is in Orissa translated' title. Vide Tribes and Castes of Bengal, I, p. 161.
Upadhyaya is, correctly speaking, quite distinct from Upadhi.
+ It will be observed that the Misr (section) occurs in both the Batebru sab.groaps
and among the Nagarkotia, so that we have three sub-sectiong-
(1) Kasbmíri-Misr, Nagarkotia.
(2) Kathu-Misr, Pakká Batebro.
(3) Mali-Misr, Bachchá Batehru.
Of these the last named are parohits of the Kashmiri Pandits, the Kashmiri. Migrs and
the Rainas.
The Nág (? section) are also thas found, for we have
(1) Nág-Pundrik, Nagarkotia.
(2) Nág-Kharappa, rakká Batehru.
(3) Nág-Gosalu, Kachchá Batehru.
It is explained that Kharappa (cobra) and Gosalu (? grass-gnako) are nicknames im.
plying contempt, as these sub-sections are of low status. But a comparison with the
Brahmans of Orissa suggests a totemistio origin for those sections : V, Tribes and Castes
of Bengal, I, p. 161.
The Awasthi too are found in all three groups.



The Brahmans of Kúngra.
129
ii.-Bachchá Batehra.-With 13 sections-
(1) Tagnet, (2) Ghabru, (3) Sughe (Parsrámie), (4) Chappal,
(5) Chath wan, (6) Awasthi-Thirkanun, (7) Awasthi-
Gargajnun, (8) Ghogare, (9) Nág-Gosalu, (10) Mali-Misr,
(11) Achária pathiari, (12) Pandit Bariswal and (13)
Awasthi-Kufarial.
· Group III.—Halbalia. - The Halbahas have 29 gots or sections:
(1) Pandit-Marchu, (2) Bhutwan, (3) Kburwal, (4) Gidgidie,
(5) Lade, (6) Pahde-Roptu, (7) Pahde-Saroch, (8) Korle,
(9) Awasthi-Chakolu, (10) Pandit-Bhangalia, (11) Narchalu,
(12) Mahte, (13) Dukwal, (14) Sanhalu, (15) Pahde-Daroch,
(16) Pandore, (17) Thenk, (18) Pahde-Kotlerie, (19) Bagheru,
(20) Bhanwal, (21) Bashist, (22) Ghutanie, (23) Mindhe-
Awasthi, (24) Prohit-Golerie, (25) Prohit-Jaswál, (26) Hasolar,
(27) Poi.Pahde, (28) Fanarach and (29) Pharerie.
Of these the first fourteen now intermarry with the Batehru, giving,
and, apparently, receiving wives on equal terms.
Hypergamy.--The Nagarkoţia take brides froin both sub-groups
of the Batehru, and they have, since Sambat 1911, also taken brides
from the Halbaha. The Batehru take wives from all the sections
of the Halbaha. When a Halbaha girl marries a Nagarkoţia, she is
seated in the highest place at marriage-feasts by the women of her hus-
band's brotherhood. This ceremony is called sara-dena and implies
that the Halbaha bride has become of the same social status as the hus.
band's kin. Money is never paid for a bride. Indved Barnes observed :-
“ So far do the Nagarkotias carry their scruples to exonerate the bridegroom from all
expense, that they refuse to partake of any hospitality at the hands of the son-in-law, and
will not even drink water in the village where he resides,"
Social relations. The accounts vary and the customs have, it is
explicitly stated, been modified quite recently. The Nagarkoţia
may eat with Batehrus and have even begun to eat kachhi from
the hands of a Halbaha according to one account. According to
another this is uot so, and a Nagarkoția who has married a Halbaha
girl may not eat at all from the hands of his wife until she has
borne at least one child, when the prohibition is said to be removed.
The Batehru and Halbaha section names. These show an extraor-
dinary jumble of Brahminical gotras (e.g., Bashist), functional and
other names, so that the accuracy of the lists is open to doubt.
It appears certain, however, that some of the sections, are named
from the tribes to whom they minister. Thus, we may assume, the
Pahda-Kotleria are Pahdas of the Kotleria Rajputs ; the Parohit-
Goleria and Parohit-Jaswál to be parohits of the Goleria and Jaswal
Rájputs, and so on. This is in accord with the system, which has been
found to exist among the Sársut of the plains, whereby the Brahman
takes his status from that of the section to which he ministers. But
status is also determined by occupation. Like the Gaddis and Ghirths
of the Kápgra and Chamba hills the Brahmans of Kangſa bave numerous
als with vaguely totemistic * names. Thus among the Nagarkotia the
* In Hissár there is a section of Brabmans, called Bhédá or sheep. This is interesting,
because on the Sutloj, at least in Kulla Saráj, there is a small caste called Bbédá, who are
hereditary victims in the sacrificial riding of a rope down the cliffs to the river. Othore



130
The Brahmans of Kangrai
Pakká Batehru have the section called Kharappá (or cobra) Nág and the
Kachchá Batehru, a section styled Ghoslá (a species of fish or possibly
grass-spake) Nág. Pundrik also appears to be a snake section. These
snake sections are said to reverence the snake after which they are
named and not to kill or injure it.
In addition to these, the Batehrn (Pakká and Kachchá) have the
following sections: -
(i) Chappal, an insect; do explanation is fortbooming.
(ii) Sugga, a parrot ; po explanation is forthcoming.
(iii) Bhángwaria, fr. bhingar, a kind of tree,
(iv) Khajáre Dogſe : Date-palm Dogfa, a section founded by a man who planted a gar.
deo of date-palms, and which originated in the Dogra country on the borders of Jammú.
(V) Ghábrú, a rascal ; one who earns bis living by fair means or foul.
In the Chamba State the Brahmans form an agricultural class,
as well as a hierarchy. Those in the capital are employed in the
service of the State or engaged in trade, while others are very poor
and eke out a living as priests in the temples, or as purohits and even
as cooks, but they abstain from all manual labour. Strict in caste ob-
servances they preserve the ancient Brahmanical gotras, but are divided
into numerous als which form three groups :-
Group I.-Als : Baru, Banbaru, Pandit, Sanju, Kashmiri Pandit, Kolue, * Baid, Gautaman,
Bugalán, Atán, Madyán, † Kanwán, Bodhrán, Baludran, Bilparu, Mangleru, Lakhyánu,
Suhálu, Nunyál, Nonyál, Sunglál, Bharáru, Turnál, Haryant, and Purohit.
Group II.-- Als: Chhunphanán, Thulyán, Dikhchat, Osti, Páde, Bhat, Dogre, Pantu,
Kuthla, Ghoretu, Pathánia, Myandhiálu, Mangleru, Katochu, Pánde, Dátwán, Dundie,
Hamlogu, Bhardiathu, Gharthalu, Hanthalu, Gwáru, Chibar, Baráre, and Datt.
Group III.--Als: Acháraj, Gujráti, Gwalha and Bujhru.
The first group only takes wives from the second, and the first two
groups have no caste relations with the third. The Brahmans of
Chamba town and Sungals disavow all caste connection with the
halbáh or cultivating Brahmans who are hardly to be distinguished
from the general rural population, though many act as priests at the
village shrines and as purohits. Many Brahmans are in possession of
sásans or grants of land recorded on copper plates. The hill Brahmans,
both men and women, eat ineat, in marked contrast to those of the
plains. In the Pángi wizárat of the Chamba State Brabwans, Rájputs,
Thákurs and Ráthis form one caste, without restrictions on food or
marriage. In the Rávi valley, especially in Churáb, and to a less degree
in Brahmaur also, free marriage relations exist among the high castos,
good families excepted. But in recent years there has been a tendency
towards greater strictness in the observance of caste rules.li
wine traces of totemism are veryʻrare among the Brahmans of the plains, though in the
sab-montane district of Ambála two are woted. These are the Pila Bheddi or "yellow
wolvee,' so called because one of their ancestors was saped by a she-wolf and so they now
worship a wolf at weddings; and Sarinhe, who are said to have once taken refuge under a
sarin tree and now revere it.
* From Kullú, so called because they came with an idol from that country. They aro
priests of the Lakshmi Narain, Damodar and Radha Krishna temples.
The Kanwán are descendants of the Brahman family from which Rájá Sáhila Varma
of Obamba purchased the site of the present capital.
I The Haryán are in charge of the Hari Rai temple.
& The ancient Sumangala, a village now held entirely by Brahmans under. & xásan grant
of the 10th century A.D They are descended from two immigrants, a Brabrachári and bis
chela, from the Kurukshetra. The two families intermarry and also give daughtors to the
Rrahmans of Chamba town.
See the Chamba State Gazetteer by Dr. James Hutchison, pp. 130...132.



The Brahmans round Simla.
131
Sársut anceser Sársut Brahmat seems clear that t/recently interneamous,
THE BRAHMANS OF THE LOW CASTES.
As we have seen the Brahmans of the higher castes form a series
of groups whose status depends on that of their clients. On a
similar principle the Brahmans of the castes which are unclean
and so outside the pale of Hinduism form distinct sub-castes outside
the circle of those who minister to the higher castes.
These sub-castes are
I.-The Chamarwá.-The Brahmans of the Chanor sub-caste of
the Chamárs.
11.-Dhanakwa. - The Brahmans of the Dhánaks or Hindu weavers
in Robtak.
III.-The Brahmans of Chúhrás.
Each of these three sub-castes appears to be now strictly endogamous,
though the Chamarwá are said to have until recently intermarried
with Chamárs. However, it seems clear that they do not intermarry
with the other Sársut Brahmans if indeed they have any claim to
Sársat ancestry. No Chamarwá Brahmaa may enter a Hindu's house.
According to a tale told in Ambála, the origin of the Chamarwa
Brahmans was this :--A Brahman, on bis way to the Ganges to bathe,
met Rám Dás, the famous Chamár bhagat. Rám Dás gave him two
cowries and told him to present them to Gangáji (Ganges), if she held
out her hand for them. She did so, and in return gave him two kangans
(bracelets). The Brahman went back to Rám Dás, who asked him
what the goddess had given him, and he, intending to keep one of the
two kangans, said she had given one only; but when he looked for them
they were not on his owu body, but in the kunda (breeches) of Rám
Dás. Rám Dás then gave him the bracelets and warned the Brahman
in future to accept gifts only from his descend ants, otherwise great
misfortune would hefall him. Accordingly his descendants only serve
Chamárs to this day. The Chamarwá are only parohits of the Chamárs,
not gurús, They must not be confounded with the masands who act as
their gurús, though either a Chamarwá Brahman or a (Chamár) masand
can preside at a Chamár's wedding. It is said that the Chamarwa is
also called a Husaini Brahman.
THE BRAHMANS IN THE Simla Hills.
North and east of Simla the Brahmans both Gaur and Sársut have
three groups: Shukal, Krishan and Pujárí or Bhojgí, the two latter
equal but inferior to the first. The Shukal are further divided into
two occupational groups (i) those who hold jagirs granted by chiefs
and who receive ample dues and (ii) thuse who receive little in fees.
The former are generally literate and do not cultivate: they observe
the rites prescribed by the Shástras. The latter are mainly agricul-
turists and practise informal as well as formal marriage and even
polyandry. The former take wives from the latter, but do not give
them. The Shukal group does not intermarry with the other two*.
The Krishan Brahmans are also cultivators and accept almost any
alms. They also practise widow remarriage and the rît custom. The
* The Shukal are not stated to correspond to the Shukla, or to be Brahmans to Brahmane
only.
The wives intermarts and acce



132
Brahmans degraded by function.
Pujárís or Bhojgís are temple-priests or chelas of a god. They appear
to have only recently become a distinct group. Some are merely pujárís
and accept no alms living by cultivation. These do not intermarry with
the Krishan Brahmans. Others accept alms in the name of a deceased
person and use the ghi with which idols are besmeared in Mágh. They
intermarry with the Krishan group.
When Paras Rám* a Gaus Brabman overthrew the Rájputs the Sársuts
protected those of their women who survived and when the Rajputs
regained power they replaced the Gauſs by Sársuts. Parus Rám had
extended his conquests as far as Nirmand in the Saraj tahsil of Kullú and
there he established a colony of Gaur Brahmans in 6 villages, still beld
in muáfi by them. These colonists are now spread over Basbahr, Kullú,
Saraj and Suket, and they are called Palsrámí or Parasramí to this day.
Both the Gaur and Sársuts are also cross-divided into the Sásaní, or
beneficed, and Dharowar groups.* The former are priests or parohits
of the ruling families, being supported by the rents of their lands and
the dues received from their clients. The latter live by cultivation, but
do pot hold revenue-free grants. Neither group accepts alms given to
avert the evil influence of certain planets or offered during an eclipse. I
. The IMPURE BRAHMANS.
We now come to deal with the groaps of Brahmans who exercise
degraded or spiritually dangerous functions. In contradistinction to
the uttam or pure' Brahmans discussed abovo-Brahmans who serve
pure castes and fulfil pure functions we find groups of Brahmans who
exercise impure or inauspicious functions. These groups are known
by various names, but in some parts of the Punjab, e.g., in Mianwali,
they are divided into two classes, the Madham, Maha-Brahman or
Acháraj, and the Kanisht. The Madham form a kind of middle class,
performing functions which though unlucky and even unclean, are
ritualístic. The Kanisht on the other hand are minor priests, whose
rites are largely magical, rather than religious; and they include such
groups as the Ved-pátr, Dakaut and Sáwadi.
* The tradition begins by asserting that the Gaur accompanied the Rájputs from the
plains, and that the latter usurped the Gaur's power. They then made the Gauſs their .
parohits, but annexed their principalities. Later Kánkubj and Maithila Brahmans
accompanied those Rájputs who escaped from the plains after the Muhammadan invasione
and found a refuge in the hills.
+ The Dharowar intermarry with the Krishan Brahmans of the Hills, and give daughters
to the sásani and Shukal groups, but not to the Krishan group.
It must not be imagined that this description exhausts the ramifications of the Bill
Brahmans. Thas in Kumhársain we learn that there are Sársut Brahmans, Jhákbrú by
family, descended from Gautama rishi, and other families descended from Bhardwaj
gishi. These latter came, some from Kárbi, others from Sindh, and they intermarry inter
se or with Bhardwaj Brahmans settled in Basbabr. They worship Brabma, as well as
Vishnu, Mahesb and the 10 incarnations. These Bhardwaj, who are known as tbe four
Brabman tols, will not intermarry with a clans Of Brahmans called Paocbi, because the
latter bave stooped to widow remarriage. Yet the Paocbi is not the lowest group. for
below it are tbe Pujáras, also Sársuts wearing the janeo, and affecting the various bill
deotrs, of whose lands they are mostly bereditary tenants. Pujáras permit the bedani
form of marriage, and also the rít syetem wbich is in vogue among the Kanets of the
Simla Hills, They can also eat from a Kanet's bands, but Paochi Brabmans will not eat
from theirs. The Pujáras are numerous and fairly widespread from Suket to Keopthal
and Bashabr, giving their name to one Pnjarli village in the last-named State, and to
another in Balsan



Brahmans degraded by function.
133
Thu Masá-BRAHMAN OR ACHÁRAJ.
Mahá-Brahman is usually said to be synonymous with Acháraj, but,
strictly speaking, the Mahá-Brahmans appear to be a sub-division of
the Garagacháraj* or Acháraj. They are themselves divided into two
groups, Garg and Sonana. On the other hand in Kángra tbe Acháraja
is said to be one of the two groups of Mahá-Brabmans.
Of these the Díkhat has the following sections :
1. Josi.
3. Sonámi. 5. Tamnáyat.
2. Kanďápí. 4. Sútrak.
The Mabá-Brahmans are endogamous. They give alms in the name
of the dead after death to Saniásís, or occasionally to a daughter's
father-in-law. The Brahmans do not receive anything in return for
performance of marriage ceremonies.
In Kángra they (and the Sáwanís) are said to have the Bárí and Bun.
jáhi groups, and this is also the case in Mianwálí. In Kángra the Achá-
raj gots are-
Asíl... Bádas. Parásar. Sándal.
A noteworthy offshoot of the Acháraj are the Par-achárait. or
Mahá-acháraj as they are called in Amritsar, I who accept those gifts
from the Acháraj which the Acháraj themselves take from other
Hindús after death.
The function of the Mahá-Brahman or Acharaj is to accept the
offerings made after a death in the name of the deceased. Originally
the term achárya meant simply a guide or teacher in matters spiritual.Š
and the process whereby it has come to denote a great sub-caste of
sin-eating' Brahmans is obscure. As a body the Acharyas trace
their origin to the 5 Gauss and the 5 Daráwars, asserting that those
who accepted offerings made within 13 days of a death were excom-
municated by the other Brahmans and formed a sub-caste. As the
only occasion on which an Achárga visits a house is at or after a death
his advent is daturally inauspicious, and his touch is pollution. After
he has quitted the house water is scattered on the floor to avert the
burning presence of death,' and, in Kángra and Multán, villagers
throw charcoal, etc., after him. In the Simla hills the Mabá-achárai
occupies a special position. He is the parohit of the king, chief or
wealthy people and represents the dead man and as his substitute is
fed sumptuously for a whole year by the kin. In some places he even
takes food from the hand of the corpse on the pyre, but this custom
is dying out and it now suffices to bribe the Maha-acháraj to eat to his
utmost capacity, the idea being that the more he eats the better it will
* Garagjí was a saint who composed the work on astrology called the Garag Sangtá, which
8 said to be rare.
† In Kángra the Par.acháraj are called Ojba and are Agam by got. In Kullú they are
known as Bhát-achárya.
I In Amritsar and Mlauwálí the Mahá-acharya make the death.gifts to their daughters
or sons-in-law : in Kángra Saniásís take these gifts in certain cases. In Sialkot the
Acháraj make them to Saniásís, or their own daughters, i.e., the Maha-acháraj appears
to be unknown.
$ Especially one who invests the student with the sacrificial thread and instructs him
in the Vedas, in the law of sacrifice, etc. ; Platts, Hindustáni Dicty.
|| Or, in Kángra, for 11 days from Brahmans, 13 from Kshatrias, 16 from Vaisyas and 31
from Sudras, i.e., during the period of impurity after a death.



134
Dakaut Weather:lore.
be for the soul.* Ordinary people, however, only feed an Acháraj for
13 days after a death, but Brahmans also receive food for the dead
oocasionally after that period.
The Acháraj, however, also officiates as a Wateshar in death
observances.
TAE DAKAUT BRAHMANS.
The Dakaut or Dak-putra derives his naine from Daka,t & Brahman
who founded the caste. Once on his way to the Ganges, Bhadli, a
Kumhární, I persuaded him to bathe instead in a pond, professing that
she could get him bathed there in the Ganges. As soon as he
touched the water he found himself by her enchantment in the river,
80 he made her his wife. Here we have an obvious allegory.
A Dakaut of Miánwalí gives another version of this legend :-
Dak was the son of Ved Viyás, the author of the Puránas, and
was chosen in a Swáyambar as her husband by Bhandlí. Bhandli
was the daughter of the Rájá of Kashmir, who celebrated her
Swayambar with the condition that she should wed the man who
answered her questions. Dak did so and married her. The Granth
Bhandlí in Punjabi gives all Bhandli's questions and Dak's answers
in verses of which the following are examples :-
Hár andherí ashtami ode chand badlon chháyá
Chári pakhí tarmali ganjar basni ayá,
Poochho, parho Pandato vácho Ved, Porán
Ek hí to páni khoo men ek hi to parí nashán
Nohárí to chándní sunre kant same ká bháo
Na barsí na goh hari na Poorab, Pachham váo
Bald bleva kharch kar dharn na jhali ghás.
A rough translation reads :
What would happen if the moon be covered by a cloud on the
eighth dark night of the moon in the month of A sárh? All, the fonr
. signs forebode the fall of rain.
einach do
The Brahman who ate from a dead man's band was a Kashmiri. In by.gone' days
wben a rájá or wealthy man died his direct passage to Beaven was secured by the follow.
ing rite. His corpse was laid out on the ground and between it and the pyre, which was
built not far off, was made a hearth on wbich khér (rice in milk) was cooked. This was
placed in a skull, which was pot in the dead man's hand, and thepoo the Braliman wag
induced to eat the khir by a fee of Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 30,000, or the grant of a village. He
thus became a tapparí (fr. khopri or khapri, a skull), and he and his children after
him were out.castes, Supernatural powers were attributed to them, and as they also
parsued usury, they rapidly grew rich. After two or three generations, however, the
Khappari's family could be re-admitted into caste on payment of a fine, and so on. A
plate or lota is said to have been substituted for the skal. In Mandi Stato a Brahman,
who must be good-looking, is fed and dressed for a year like the deceased Rájá. At the ex.
piration of the year he is turned out of the State, and goes to Hardwár. He must never look
back on the journey, and is never allowed to return to the State, wbich pays him a pension,
+ In Mianwali the Dakauntri (sic) are said to be Súds by caste and descendants of Dak
Bandlí, who composed a granth on astrology called the Bandli Granth. In Rohtak tho
Daks are said to be descended from Sahdec rishi, a dacoit (whence their name) who
composed the Sahdeo Bhádlí (Bhadlí, his wife, was a sweeper woman). In this work natural
phenomena are interpreted to forecast the future ; e.g., Sukkar wálí bádli rahi sanishchar,
chúe kuhe Sahdeo : 'sun Bádli bin barse nahin jáe.' i.e., “If clouds appear on Friday
and stay till Saturday, they will not pass away without rain." In these verses Sahdeo
usually addresses Bhádlí.
$ In Gurgaon too Sahdeo is said to have met a sweeper woman who told him tbat the
auspicious momeot had passed and bade him dive in a tank. He did so, and brought up
first a gold bracelet and then an iron one. Thinking bor an expert he married her,



135
Dahaut functions.
Ask the pandits to study the effectis of this rainfall in the Vedas or
Paránas.
The results are that there will be no water left anywhere save
a little in wells and in other low places (meaning that this in.
auspicious rainfall will be followed by a scarcity of rain).
If it does not rain and the wind does not blow for 9 months what will
be the result ?
The land will have no verdure and it is better to leave it with bag and
baggage.
Púrab uthe badlí, pachham chale wá,
Dak kahe sun Dhandlí manji andar pá.
"If a cloud appear from the east and the wind blow from the
west; Dak would ask Bhandlí to take her cot inside..
Titan kha khá badlá đam malái khá.
O wase, O ujre khálí koi na já.
A cloud like partridge feathers, and a woman given to eating cream ;
the one will rain and the other bring ruin, without a doubt.'
Another story is that when Rám Chandar invaded Ceylon, both he
and his enemy Řawana were under Saturn's sinister influence, and
before he crossed the strait which he had bridged Rána Chandar
desired to give alms. But neither the Brahmans nor the Mahá-
Brahmans nor the Biás, would accept them, and in answer to his
prayer Brahma created a doll of grass, sprinkled sar jiwan* amrit
over it by cutting Párbati's little finger, and thus endowed it with
life. Shivji and Durga bestowed on him veracity, the janeo and the
tilak, and Brahma bade him receive the alms offered to Ráhú and
Ketu, and to Saturn-whence he was also called Saníchari. .
The Dakaut, however, bears yet other names. As he knows a little
astrology and can divine the evil influence of the planets, he is
sometimes styled Jotgí ; in Rúpar he is called Panda, and round
Sirhind and Maler Kotla Dhaonsít. One group is called Arpopot
because it is skilled in palmistry.
From Sialkot comes a still more curious legend: Váráh Mihr, a great
astrologer from the Deccan, came in the course of his wanderings to a
Gújar village. While discoursing to the people his period of yoga
ended, and he confessed that had he been at home that day his wife
would have conceived and borne a son of marvellous intelligence. His
* Whence the name Dakaut quhká-put. In Gurgaon dak is said to mean 'wanderer.'
In this District the Dak is said to be no true Brahman, but a singularly astute cheat whose
victims are mainly women. These he instigates to burn 7 tungas (thatched roofs?) of a
hut on 7 successive Saturdays, in order to secure male issue. Or he sets husband and wife
by the ears by declaring that their burj or stars do not coincide, and that remedial measures
must be taken. Seated among the women he looks at the hand of one and the forehead of
another : consults his patrá or table, counts on his fingers, and then utters common.
place predictions. He knows hardly any astrology. On Saturday he goes round begging
with an idol of Sanishchar, and he accepts a buffalo calf born in Mágh or a foal born in
Sáwan, or any black animal.
† See Punjabi Dicty', p. 305.
Cf, Harar-popo among the Bhátrás, where it is said to equal thog, In Karnál the Arar.
popo is described as a beggar who may be a Gaur Brahman or a Chauháu (Rajput).
$ The Bhojkís are quite distinct from the Dakauts, but owing to similarity of function the
Dakauts are sometimes called Bhojki, e.g., in Jaipur.



136
Dakaut functions.
hostess asked him to form a temporary union with her daughter-in-law
on the condition that her child should belong to him. So Dak was
born. Years after Dak had to be surrendered to his father despite
his attachment to his mother's kin, but on the road home he saw that
the corn in one field was mixed with stalks of a different kind like
those in one close by. His father, lowever, taught him that those
stalks belonged not to the sower but to the owner of the field* ; and
Dak applying the analogy to his owu case compelled his father to
restore him to his mother's kipsfolk. He founded the Dakauts.
None of these variants quite agreo with the account of the Dakauts
given in the Karnál Gazetteer, 1890, which runs :-
The Dakauts came from Agroha in the Dakhan. Rájá Jasrat
(Dasaratha), father of Rámcbandra, had excited the anger of Saturday
by worsbipping all the other grahas but him. Saturday accordingly
rained fire on Jasrat's city of Ajudhia. Jasrat wished to propitiate him,
but the Brahmans feared to take the offering for dread of the conse-
quences; so Jasrat made from the dirt of his body one Daká Rishi wbo
took the offerings, and was the ancestor of the Dakauts by a Sudra
woman. The other Brabnians, however, disowned him; so Jasrat
consoled him by promising that all Brahmans should in future consult
his children. The promise has been fulfilled. The Dakauts are pre-
eminent as astrologers and soothsayors, and are consulted by every
class on all subjects but the dates of weddings and the names of children,
on which the Gaurs advise. They are the scapegoats of the Hindu
religion; and their fate is to receive all the unlucky offerings which no
other Brahman will take, such as black things and dirty clothes..
Especially they take the offerings of Wednesday, Saturday, and Ket.
They are so unlucky that no Brahman will accept their offerings, and
if they wish to make them, they have to give them to their own sister's
sons. No Hindu of any caste will eat any sort of food at their hands,
and at weddings they sit with the lower castes; though of course they
only eat food cooked by a Brahman. In old days they possessed the
power of prophecy up to 10-30 A.m.; but this has now failed them.
They and the Gujrátis are always at enmity, because, as they take
many of the same offerings, their interests clash.
In Kångra a confused variant of this legend makes Dak the astro-
loger's son by a Ját girl, and Bhándlí the daughter of a Rájá, whom
Dak won in a swayambara. answering all her questions by his art.
Their son was Bojrú.
Another variant makes Garg give a miraculous fruit to the daughter
of Gautama rishi. She eats it and vomits up a boy, who is in con-
sequence called dak (vomiting)..
In the Simla hills two legends regarding the origin of the Dakauts
are current. According to the first the birth of Saturn,t decreased the
Sun's light and power of illumination, so a Brahman propitiated the
planet. Saturn was so pleased that he bade the Brahman ask a boon
and agreed to become his pupil. He also proclaimed his intention of
persecuting mankind unless placated by constant worship and devotion
* The theory of paternity in Hindu Law is based upon a closely similar idea.
† Hindu mythology avers that the sun lost a sixteenth of his power on the birth of
Saturn, his son,



The Bojrús.
187
His evil influence was to last for 7 years, but he assured the Brahman
that he should be kept in comfort provided he and his descendants
worshipped the god. The Dakauts are his descendants.
The other story is that the Brahman fell under Saturn's evil influ-
ence. He was instructing a king's daughter, and in the room was a
wooden peacock which swallowed its pearl necklace. The Brahman
vas suspected of its theft and kept in custody for 2 days when,
Saturn's influence ceasing, the necklace was disgorged by the bird and
his innocence proved. When he reproached the god Saturn coolly told
him that he was lucky in getting off with 21 days instead of the full
term of 74 years of ill-luck.
In the Kángra hills the Dakaut is usually called Bojrú*. Bojrú
means thought-reader and in olden times the Bojrús practised black
magic, not astrology, Now-a-days they practise palmistry.
In Kángra the Bojrú or Dakaut groups are said to be 36 in number;
of these the following are found in that District :-
In Pálampur tahsil-
1. Subachh.
3, Báchh.
5. Pánus ? Tánus.
2. Parásar.
4. Gol.
6. Nágás.
In Kángra tahsil
Shakartári ... Machh got. Mallian
Bawalia .. Nágás got. | Bhuchal .Nágás got.
In Hamirpur tahsil-
Shakartárí.
Gaur.
Lalian.
The Dakauts in Mianwálí are said to be Vasisht by gotra.
In the Punjab the Bojrús are called Teli-rájás, because they rub their
bodies with oil, wear clothes soaked in oil and make a tíká of vermilion
on their foreheads. They mostly beg from women, and carry about
with thein an image of Jawálámukhí who lives, they say, in Kárgra,
and declares her acceptance of an offering by burning one half of it
with her fiery tongue. Women are induced to give rings and clothes to
the idol in return for dhúp and sandhúr sanctified by the goddess' touch.
Small-pox is cured by applying the sandhur to the patient or burning
the dhúp before him. The Telí-rájás also tell fortunes by the samudrik.
The Dakauts have 36 gots or sásans like the Gaurs including the
following:
Agarwal.
Gosí, Ghosí.
Paria, Peria.
Chhalondia.
Jol.
Rai.
Dhakari.
Káyastha.
Gadhigoria,
Kant.
Rower Shankartáh.
Kesríwál.
Gangora.
alia n.
Ginin.
Mahar.
Vaid.
Gor, Gaur, from Gaur in Malpian.
Satwál.
Bengal.
Pagoshia.
In Jínd five gots are found, viz., Raike, (wbich stands highest of all),
Pagoshia, Lalan, Paryá and Gorya. All these intermarry.
Gora.
* And the name lakaut is said to be derived from dak, a small drum, which the Boirás
beat on Saturdays when begging; but it is also said that Dak was the son of Garg rishi by
& Kumhární. They also beat a small drum over one's head to drive away evil.



188
The Sawanis.
Of the 36 sásans 30 are found in Nábhá (where they are called
Jotgís) and the other 6 form the sub-caste called the Purbia or Eastern
Dakauts who are of inferior status.* These two sub-castes eat and
drink together, but do not intermarry, Betrothals are negotiated by
Mirásís, not by Náís. In marriage 4 gots are avoided, † and karewa
is allowed. None of the 5 pure Brahman groups certainly, or any
other Brahman, it is said, will eat with the Dakaut or smoke with
them : nor will Bániás do so.
These Dakauts take offerings (lán) and alms (pún). They accept
chháyá dáns, as well as those made to Saníchar (Saturn), Ketú and
Ráhú. They also beg on Saturdays, receiving oil and coppers from
Hindús. When begging they carry an iron image of Saturn. These
dáns are supposed to be karúrt (hard, inauspicious) and to bring evil
influences on the recipients, whence the proverb:
Rál Bágar se upje, burá Brahman se hoe.
'Famine comes from the Bágar, and evil is done by the Brabman.'
In Rohtak they live by palmistry and by begging, especially on a
Saturday on which day they beg for oil, soap, coppers, a goat,
he-buffalo, camel, horse, black grain, or other mean gifts. Some of
them make a phere or tarn,' by going through a fixed number of
lanes and repeating a fixed number of sentences at each door at a certain
hour-usually early in the day. Besides gifts of oil made before bathing
on a Saturday, Dakauts take gifts of iron, oil, salt, sweets, clothes,
etc., weighed against persons who are under the influence of Saturn.
The Dakauts observe all the Brahmanical ceremonies, and have
Brahmans of their own. On the birth of a son they perform the
ordinary Brahmanical rites, the nám-karan, chaul karan, anna-prásna,
chúra-karan, and unrayan karan. Their betrotha!, wedding and
general rites are also like those of other Brahmans.
The Dakauts study astrology in the Bhadri Chhand and other Hindi
chhands, sometimes also from Sanskrit works,
THE SÁWANI OR SANWNI BRAHMANS.
Another term equivalent to Dakaut or Vedwá is Sáwani, a Brahman
who in Gurgaon interprets natural phenomena or the voices of birds
and animals to forecast the future. The Sáwanís appear to come from
Because it is said they eat flesh and drink liquor, which the Jotgis eschew, But the
real reason would appear to be that they will accept certain offerings which a pure Brah.
man would not take, such as those made to avert the influence of Ráhá and Ketú.
The Dakauts have also the Brahmanical gotrus, Bhardwaj, Bashist, etc., (Nábhá).
t Ondy one sásun is avoided according to the Nábhá account,
I Dakauts, however, do not accept offerings made on the dead. These go to the Achárai
or Mahá. Brahman.
$ In Ferozepore they beg for oil of rapeseed in small quantities almost as of right,
singing :-
Tel tambe kú mel,
... “Oil and copper go together, he who
Chhanichhar munúre,
therewith worships Saturn will be for
Sadá sukh páwe.
I ever happy.'' i '
Well-to.do Hindús pour a little oil into a vessel, enough to reflect their face in, and give
it to the Dakaut. This ensures them long life.



139
Tho Ved-pátra.
Lucknow, but the name is known as far west as Dera Ismail Khan and
Babáwalpur.*
THE VED-páte BRAHMANS.
It is not easy to say definitely what the Ved-pátr is. The word
itself would certainly appear to mean “ vessel of the Vedas," and those
of the Ved-pátr who study the Vedas and expound them to disciples
are styled Ved-páthis.t Others, it is said, merely perform the sapindi
and pind-chhedan karm on the 12th day after a death, but these rites
are usually performed by an Acháraj.
In Gurgaon the Ved-pátrs accept alms at eclipses and are also
known as Gujrátís, and this is the case in Sialkot too, but in Amritsar
the Ved-pátr ranks below the Gujrátís and traces his descent from Ved
Datt, the son of the Gujrátí Sahdeo by a Sudra woman. The Ved.
pátr is also called Vedwá, and the Dakauts are an inferior branch of the
Vedwás, being descendants of Dak who married Patlí a Mlechh woman.
The Vedwás take chháyk-pátr and other forbidden gifts, such as cocks
and goats ; but the Dakaut is on an even lower plane for he accepts
buffaloes, male or female, horses, etc., while standing in water.
In Bannú the Gujrátí is said to be also known as Ved-pátr, which
again is equivalent to Dak, or in Kashmir and the hills to Bojrú; in
Pesháwar and Kohát to Pandit or Madho; in Dera Ismail Khán to
Sávaní; and in Lahore, etc., to Dakaut. Dak, a Brahman, is said to
have married Bhadlí, a courtezan, and from them are descended the
Daks, whose gotra is Kaplash, their gots being-
(Bakhar.
| Dagwa.
i Bakar.
In Bannu ... Tahir.
| In Dera Ismail Khán ... 3 Vedp-l.
| Patiwál.
i Brahmi, etc.
(Rathor.
The Dakaats accept unlucky offerings, such as satana (7 kinds of
grain mixed),,oil, iron, goats, buffaloes and chháyá-pátr on Saturdays
and eclipses. They also practise palmistry according to the Samudrak
Shástras, and swindle women, whom they frighten by means of charms
www.
* In Miánwálí the Sáwanís are said to live by astrology and magic, divining evil
influences by means of two iron pegs in a cup, in some obscure way, after the manner of the
Jogís and Muhammadan Dorás. In Baháwalpur they are described as wandering out-castos,
descended from a Brahman by a sweeper woman. Khatrís, Aroſás and other Brahmans will
not associate with them and they accept black gifts at eclipses, etc.
+ See Platts, p. 1208. Platts does not give Ved-pátr, but both in Gurgaon and Rohtak pátr
is declared to mean“ vessel."
# The Vedwá takes alms on Saturdays, Sundays and Tuesdays, also when the sun passes
into Ráhú and Ketú, as well as to avert their influence at any other time.
Offerings tu Brahmans are dirided into bar or graha, for the days of the week, and the
two grahin for Rábú and Ket, the two demons who canse eclipses by attacking the sun
and moon. These two are parts of a demon (rákshasa), who, when sitting at dinner with
the gods and demons drank of the nectar of the gods instead of the wine of the demons.
The sun and moon told of him, and Bhagwán cut him into two parts, of which Ráhú, in-
clading the stomach and therefore the nectar, is the more worthy. When any body wishes
to offer to Brahmans from illuess or other cause, he consults a Brahman who casts
his horoscope and directs which offering of the seven grahas should be made. The grahins
are more commonly offered during an eclipse, that to Ráhú being given at the beginning
and that to Ket at the end of the transit. The Gaur Brahmane will not take ans black
offerings, such as a buffalo or goat, iron, sesame (til) or urd, black blankets or clothes,
salt, etc., nor oil, second hand clothes, green clothes; ror satndja, which is seren grains
mixed, with a piece of iron in them; these belonging to the grahe whose offerings are
forbidden to them. An exception, however, is made in favour of black cow,



2
140
The Dasaurias and Biás,
written on paper in invisible ink. These practices are, however, said to
be confined to Dakauts from Kángļa.
THE DABAURIA BRAHMANS,
The Saurias or Dasaurias* practise exorcism in the following way mo
Four or more are called in and they apply fumes to the patient's
nostrils, while le sits on his feet, reciting meanwhile cbarms like this:
Le bulare mere bhalna, ae apní laher sambhál, “Jump up, my sturdy
one, come in your ecstasy." What with the heat and the strong scent
the patient perspires freely, and this operation is repeated twice a day
until his senses return. The exorcisers get Rs. 5 or 10 as their fee.
The patient is fed on almonds and chúri.t. The solemnity of the rite is
sometimes enhanced by performing it on a burning ground.t.
A few Saurias are found in Rohtak where they work wonders with
charms. They can thirust a sword through a man without hurting
him, and bring sickness on an enemy. In Gurgaons by collecting a
dead man's bones they magically obtain full control over his ghost, and
to defeat them one of the bones should always be hidden. In Sialkot
they are exorcisers, but also haunt burning-grounds.
THE GUJRÁTÍ or Blás BRAHMANS.
The Gujrátí is a territorial group, which immigrated from Guzerát.
Gujráti Brahmans also bear the following professional titles :-
Bias, meaning updeshak or preacher. 6. Tarwári, or ono who has performed a
3. Joshi, for Jotashi, astrologer.
karma kánd of ten sanskurs, directed
3. Pándáji,=Pandita.
others to perforın them and himself
. Mahta or chief.
acted as a priest at those rites.
5. Ráwal or itinerant sádhú.l]
7. Jánji, or family priest, who used to act
as a go-between at betrothals, as the
Náis now do.
The Gujrátí Brahmans also have 4 main groups which rank in the
following order :-
3. Andich or Paháři.
1. 2. Nágar or Visalnagars. ** 4. Bárația or Srimáli.
Of these groups the Vadanágar are the púj (family priests) of the
Nágars, whose daughters they take in marriage and with whom they
eat both kachchi and pakki. The Nágars, however, cannot take
Vadanagar girls in marriage. Both these first two groups avoid any
intercourse with the two last. The Bárarias are the Biás of the
nichi-sharan or lower grade ; because Bárar married a girl of his own
family.
The relations of the Gujrátí to other Brahmans are curiously
contradictory at first sight, but perfectly logical in reality. Owing to
their strictness in religious observances, and their purity in food and
Sub-caste ). ( 1. Vadanagar.
.
* The practices here ascribed to the Saurias are also said to be characteristic of a Sársut
sub-caste, called Chanpan.
+ Wheaten bread kneaded with ghi.
À But in Miánwálí a group of the Sársuts called Channan performs this.
Ś The form in Gurgaon is Sevra and in Amritsar apparently Sarorei.
i These occupations are not now followed, necessarily, by those who bear these titles,
The Vadanágar are said to take their Dame from Vadadagri, a town east of Pattan.
** From Visal town, but see the text.



The Husainis.
141
dress they rank as the bighest* of all the Brahman groups, and confer
the ashirbad or benediction on the Gaur and the Sársut. In spite
of this they are all looked down upon for taking the chhayát (shadow),
grahant (eclipse) and tula dáng (offerings) : that is to say, they aro
despised for taking upon themselves the sins of the community.
In marriage two gotras are usually avoided, but sometimes only ono
is excluded. Exchange marriages are very common. At a wedding
the bridegroom wears a sihrá or chaplet only, and not a crown (maur).
The pair are dressed like Shiva and Párbatí in silk.||
At weddings the Nágars worship Sbiva the destroyer, and at
funerals Vishnu the nourisher, a curiously perverse reversal of the
ordinary rule. Shiva is their isht-dewa. They observe the ten karms
of Shiva, and are guided by the Parvami-mánsá or Jaimni-sutra.
The Gujrátí gotras are :--
Gargas,
Itri.
Párásar.
Gautam.
Káshiva.
Sonoras,
The Gujrátí are said to bave no gots.
THE AUSAINI BRAHMANS.
The Husaini Brahmans are Hindus, wear the janeo and mark the
vilnk on their foreheade, but they beg from Muhammadans and not
from Hindús, and narrate the story of Hazrat Imám Husain, whence
they are called fusaini. They say they were originally Bháț Brahmans,
and have some of their gots :-Gappe, Bhákar, Lande, Gáre, Dargopal,
Ratí, Chat Chút, Rabat, Bharadwaji, Dángmár, and many more. They
marry in their own caste, avoidirg 4 gots in marriage. They cannot
* They do not eat kachchi or pakki cooked by Gaur or Sársut Brahmans: nor any Ilindu
caste; but they may take sweet stuff cooked in milk by people of such pure Hindu castes
as the Gaur and Sársut Brahmans, and the Bánias. The Gujráti or Biús Brahmans, who
came from Guzerát are in some respects the highest class of all Brahmans; they are
always fed first; and they bless a Ganţ when they meet him, while they will not eat
ordinary bread from his hands. They are fed on the 12th day after death, and the Gaurs
will not eat on the 13th day, if this has not been done. But they take inauspicious
offerings. To them appertain especially the Ráhu offerings made at an eclipse. They will
not take oil sesame, goats, or green or dirty clothes; but will take old clothes if washed,
buffaloes, and sainája. They also take a special offering to Ráhó made by a sick person,
who puts gold in ghi, looks at his face in it, and givng it to a Gajrati, or who weighs himself
against satnája and makes an offering of the graio. A boffalo which has been possessed
by a devil to that degree that he has got on to the top of a bouse (often no difficult feat
in a village). or a foal dropped in the month of Sáwan or buffalo calf in Mágh are given
to the Gujráti as being onlucky. No Gaur would take them. Every harvest the Gajráti
takes a sinall allowanco (seorhi) of grain from the threshing floor, just as does the Ganr.
† The chháyá-dán is so called because in sickness the giver looks at his reflection in some
ghé poured into a bronze cup (katorj). If he is unable to see his face in the ghi he will die.
The dán itself comprises the cup, with the panj-ratan.
Other dáns are ; the Ráhú and Ketú dáns, which consist of black cloth, flowers, etc., like
the Sanichar dán they are offered to Ráhu, Ketú and Sanichar in sickness, or at weddings.
The máhá dán or “great gift," consisting of land or elephants, and made at death. The room
bharni-bidhi dán of black cloth is made to avert disease (rog).
I Tha grahn.dán comprises gold, silver placed in a cocoanut, and ornaments. It must be
given by the offerer standing in the water of the tank at Thánesar, Grain, clothes or
cows may be given at home.
$ The tulá dán is an offering equal to one's weight in grain or coin. It is made by
wealthy people on their birthday.
Other Hindús are, it is said, dressed like Krishna and Radha. The sihra is a brida)
chaplet, the maur or mukat is a paper crown, worn by the bridegroom. Krishna ay &
wearer of the latter is called Muktdhárí. Shiva or Mahadeva had no maur, even at his
wedding, whereas Krishna always wears the mukat. This is interesting, but it loaves the
use of the crown at Weddings unexplained.



142
The Religion of the Brahmans.
not the sa heads in sua Muhammadan B
few have led any netting the followigeb.divisione: d Gurú of the
marry with Bhát Brahmans, but take water from their hands and vice
versá. They are ignorant of their own religion and do not worship in
mandars, but their janeos are made by Brahmans; and auspicious times
for weddings, etc., are fised by them. They have the same customs as
other Hindús, and believe in their pantheon. Their own tradition is
that Yazid's troops on their return, after cutting off Imám Husain's
head, stopped in Ráhab, their ancestor's home at Báthowál in the
Sialkot District, and placed the head in his house. In the morning,
finding the head to be that of the Prophet, he kept it, and gave the
soldiers his own son's head instead, but they discovered that it was
pot the same as the one they had brought. So Ráhab cut off all his
seven sons' heads in succession and gave them to the soldiers. Since
then Husainis beg from Muhammadans.
THE RELIGION OF THE BRAHMANS.
The Brahman, even the Husaini, is almost always a Hindu, but a
few have become Sikhs. Conversion, however, does not appear to
have created any new divisions in the caste, though it has had a
disruptive influence in the following case --The Pátak section of
the Sársut Brahmans has two subdivisione, Machbí-kháná and
Khír-kháriá. The former are parohits of the third Gurú of the Sikhs
(Gurú Amar Dás), who was a Baishnav (abstainer from meat and
drink) The second Gurú (Angad) used to eat meat and fish. In
order to follow the second Gurú's habit and get maintain his Baishnav.
ship, the third Gurú gave a fish at the bhnddan (head-shaving)
ceremony of his son to his parohit, and so his descendants are called
Machhí-khánás (fish-eaters to this day. And the descendants of the
third Gurú at a son's bhaddan at their temple at Gondwal in Amritsar
give a fish, made of gram flour and boiled in oil, to their parohit (a
descendant of the original Machhí-kháná) instead of a žive one. The
ceremony, however, no longer called bhaddan-since shaving the head
is prohibited among the Sikhs-and in its stead, the custom is to make
the boy wear his hair long like a Sikh's, whereas before that the boys'
hair was cut and plaited like a girl's.
BeadM-CHARí,* a religious student; a Brahman from the time of his investi-
ture with the Brahmanical thread until he becomes a house-holder;
one who studies the Vedas under a spiritual teacher; an ascetic, a
class of Hindu Sádhus.
BROK-PA, "highlander,' a term applied to the Soin element in Báltistán:
Biddulph, Tribes of the Hinloo Koosh, Ch. IV.
BÚBAK, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán and in Baháwalpur.
Buch, a Ját or Rájput clan found in Multán tahsíl, where they were settled
by Shahzáda Murád Bakhsh, governor of Multán, under Shah Jabán.
BUDA, a Baloch cao (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BUDHEKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BUDAwál, a clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
Budlí, Budní, the people, now extinct or absorbed, which held the country
from Nangrahár to the Indus prior to the Afghan immigrations. Thoy
were divided into several tribes and are described by the Akhúnd
Darweza as Káfirs, but be does not refer to them as Buddhists.
* Burmh or Barahm, is corrupted from the Sanskrit word Brahma.



Bughti-Bulurg.
143
Bugatr, Bugti, also called Zarkanni, an organized BALOCA tuman which occu-
pies the angle between the frontiers of the Punjab and Upper Sindh.
Its clans are the Raheja, Notháni,* Masori, Kalphúr, Phong or Mondráni
and Shambáni or Kíazai. The last, which is an almost independent
section, separates the main tribe from our border; while the Marri lie
still further west. The Bugti are made up of various elements, chiefly
Rind, but claim descent from Gyándár, son of Mír Chákur, whose
son Raheja gave his name to one of its septs, though the name has an
Indian sound. The Notháni clan has supernatural powers (see p. 46,
supra) and the Shambáni form a sub-tuman, which is sometimes con-
sidered distinct from the Bugti. This tuman has its head-quarters at
Syáháf, formerly Marrao or Dera Bíbrak (fr. biraragh, a chief), also
called Bugtí Dera.
Búraş, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar: also in the Baháwalpur,
Bíkáner and Jaisalmer States, and in Sindh, as well as scattered over
Multán and Muzaffargarh. They are labourers, tenants and camel-
breeders in the South-West Punjab and intermarry with the Dahás,
Palyárs and Parháls, all branches of the Punwár stuck.
Bok, a Mahtam clan (agricultural, found in Montgomery.
Bukhárí, a Sayyid clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar : see Sayyid.
BUKNERA, a Kbarral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BulEdhı (Buledi, Bulethi, Burdi), an organized Baloch tuman in Dera Ghází
Khán, also found near the Indus in Upper Sindh, in the tract called
Burdika, and in the Kachhi territory of Kalát.
Búná, BÚNIYA: see Cbamár.
Burá, a small Ját clan, found in Jind. The sariádh of its jathera is at
Kallu Kotli in Pațiála, and it is worshipped at weddings.
BuŘáná, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur. -
BURAÑAS. -The Buraras, originally named Hojali, are claimed by some
as a Samma sept, but others say they are a separate tribe. Their
tradition is that they are descended from a Rája of Girnár near
Junagadh, who migrated to Sindh and was converted to Islám. The
saint who converted him gave him a bur (Ar. for "cloak,”) whence
their pame. They have three septs:-
(i) Bhojri or Bhojri-patias, found in Baháwalpur and Bíkáner, and
the highest in status, (ii) Sathia, and (iii) Jokhia.
BÚRISI: see Yashkun..
BURRA, a Ját tribe, found in Dera Ghazi Khán and Baháwalpur. The title
of Jám is prefixed to their names and it is probably of Sindhi origin.
Butá, a Ját tribe, apparently confined to Hoshiarpur. Possibly the same as
the Bhutta of the Western Plains or the Buţtar of the Sikh tract. :
BUTARÁ, fr, but, a stcne. A caste of stone-cutters, found in the Kángra hills,
who used to be emp oyed on the forts and temples of that tract. Barnes
described them as idle and dissipated.
BUȚȚAR, a small Ját tribe found chiefly on the Upper Sutlej said to be
descended from a Súrajbansi Rájput who came from the Lakki jungle
and settled first in Gujranwala. Also found as a Hindu Ját clan (agri-
cultural) in Montgomery
Buzora, a title meaning saint,' acquired for instance by the Akhund of
Swát in addition to that of Akhúnd.
* With two clans Zemakani or Durragh and Pherozání.



145
Notr.-Owing to the confusion between Ch and Chh-which is not confinod to writings
in English - and that between J and Ch, which is frequent in Urdu writing, the articles
under this lottor are not all warranted to be correctly placed.
CHABELDÁS(1), -PANTHI; a petty sect, founded by an Aroſa disciple of Shúmjí,
named Chabeldás, whose shrine is at Makhowal Kalán in the Sanghar
tahsil of Dera Ghazi Khán. Its tenets differ little from those of
Shamji's followers. See Shúindási.
Cuáciar, an agricultural clan, found in Shahpur and Multán, classed as Ját
in the latter District. In Baháwalpur "the Cháchaſs claim Mughal
origin and they produce tables tracing their descent from Timúr whom
they connect with Abbás, cousin of Husain, son of Ali. But tradition
says that the Surar, Subhágo, Sílro and Cháchar tribes were once slaves
of Rííja Bungá Rái, ruja of Amrkot, and that Jám Jhakhar redeemed
them, and there is a saying:
Surar, Subhágo, Silro, chauthi Chácharić,
Anda hú Jám Jhakhare há háhnán Bunga Ra.
“Surar, Sabhágo (or Subhágál, Sílro (or Sílrá), (these three) and a
fourth tribe, the Chachar were the slaves of Bungá Rái ; it was Jám
Jhak haſ who brought them," (effecting their emancipation from Bungá
Rái).
The Cháchars have several septs :-Raj-de, the highest in status ;
Rahmáni, whose ancestors were khalifas of Ghaus Bahá-ud-Din Zakariya :
hence they are also called Shaikh-Rahmáni, and some sanctity still
attaches to the sept; Nárang, Jugána, Jhunjha, Chhutta, Gureja,
Rukana, Kalra, Mudda, Dúwáni, Dohija, Gabráni, Múría, Kharyani
and Zakriáni or followers of Ghaus Bahá-ud-Din Zakariya.
The whole tribe, however, are followers of that saint and never
become disciples of any but his descendants. Cháchaſ is also an Aráiņ
clan in the Punjab. Cf. Chachhar.
CAACHHAR, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
CHADÁNA, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHADDHÁ, (?) a sept of Khatrís and of Jáțs.
CHÄDDRAR, the correct form of Chhadhar (q. v.).
CHADDÚ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
CHADHAR, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur, Multán and Montgomery
(Muhammadan). It is classed as Ját in the two latter districts. Doubt.
less the same as the Chhadhar (q. v.).
CôAdwí, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHÁHAK, a doubtful synonym of Cháhng.
CHAHANG, see Cháhng.
Chánaş, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,



148
Cháual-Chaka.
CHÁHAL, or more correctly Cháhil... One of the largest Ját tribes in the
Punjab. They are found in greatest numbers in Patiala, but are very
numerous in Ambála and Ludhiána, Amritsar, and Gurdaspur, and extend
all along under the hills as far west as Gujranwala and Sialkot. It is
said that Rájá A garsen Súrajbansi had four sons, Cháhil, Chhina, Chíma,
and Sáhi, and that the four Ját tribes who bear these names are
sprung from them: (yet they intermarry). Their original home was
Málwa, whence they migrated to the Punjab. According to another story
their ancestor was a Túnwar Rajput called Rájá Rikh, who came from
the Deccan and settled at Kahlur. His son Bírsi married a Ját woman,
settled at Matti in the Málwa about the time of Akbar, and founded
the tribe.
In Amritsar the Cháhil say that Chahal was a son of Rájá Khang,
who once saw some fairies bathing in a tank. He seized their clothes
and only restored them on condition that one of them became his
bride. One Ichhrán was given him, on condition that he never abused
her, and she bore him a son, but one day he spoke harshly to her and she
disappeared.* But to this day no Cháhil ever abuses his daughter! Settled
first at Kot Gadána near Delhi, the Cháhil migrated to Pakhi Cháhilán
near Ambála and there founded Rala Joga or Jogarla in the Málwa.
The Cháhil affect Jogi Pír, originally Joga, son of Rajpal, who is said
to have been killed, after fighting with the Mughals even when he had
been decapitated. Jogi Pír is their chhara (? jathera), and a fair is held
in his honour on the 4th naurátra in Asauj. In Jind the Chahil
claim descent from Bala, a Chauhan Rajput who took a Ját wife, and
80 lost caste, but he acquired influence by accepting offerings made to
Gúga, and Cháhils, whatsoever their caste, still take these offerings.t
In Jind the Cháhiſ worship Khera Bhúmia.
They are probably, says Mr. Fagan, Bágris, originally settled in
Bíkáner.
Chahal, a Hindu and Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in
Montgomery.
Cháong, Cháng, a minor agricultural caste, found in the western portion of
the lower ranges of Kángra and Hoshiárpur. In the Dasúya tahsíl of
the latter district they own some villages, but are generally tenants.
The term appears to be a purely local synonym of Bahti or Ghirth.
The Cháng is quiet and inoffensive, diligent and a good cultivator, like
the Saini of the plains.
CHÁik, a sept of Brahmans, hereditary priests of Keonthal.
CAAINA, a small tribe, classed as Ját, in Dera Gházi Khán.
Csák, (1) a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar, (2) a sept of Játs
to which Ránjha is sometimes said to have belonged. I
CHÁK!, CHAKÁNÍ, the Multáni equivalent for Teli or oilman.
* Through an opening in the roof-and so the Cháhil do not make openings in their roofs
to this day. They also avoid wearing red clothes ; and, till recently, at any rate, did not
use baked bricks in their houses--a relic of the time when they were nomads, probably...
+ In J'nd tahsil it is indeed said that the pujóris of Gúga are generally called cháhil : in
Sanorúr they are known as bhagats. In Patiála Cháhil is said to have been born of a hili
fairy : and. Baland Jogi Pír is worshipped as their jathera.
I Panjábi Dicty., p. 179.



Chakarkea-Chamár.
147
a come
CHAKABKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
CHAKORA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CHAKRÁLAwí, fr. Chakrála a village in Miánwálí: a new sect, which
rejects more than half the Qurán, founded by one Ghulam Nabi of
Chakrála, whose followers call themselves Ahl-¿-Qurán, i.e., believers
in the Qurán only. It rejects all the other traditions of the Prophet.
Its founder has now changed his name to Abdulláh as he objected
to being called ghuliem (servant) of the Prophet. He believes that the
Qurán is the only book which lays down what is required of a true
Muslim and that the other subsidiary books and sayings of Muhammad
are of no account. He has accordingly devised a new form of prayer
which is distinct from that prescribed by the Prophet. .
His followers are numerous in the Shahbáz Khel and Yáru Khel
villages of the Mianwali tahsil, as well as in Dera Ismaíl Khan and
Lahore. A monthly journal called the Isháat-ul-Qurán used to be
published by Shaikh, Chittu, a leading adherent of the sect in Lahore.
As the sect did not thrive at Lahore its founder has now settled in
Dera Ismail Khán.
Chámal, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHAMAIN, a tribe of Gujars, claiming descent from & Tunwar Rajput by a
Gujar mother. They came from Delhi and are very old inhabitants of
the Karnál District, having possibly been expelled from Delhi by Sher
Sháh. Chamain is probably only a local appellation.
CHAMÁR, Chamiár, fem. Chamárí, -iárí.
The Chamár is the tanner and leather-worker of North-Western In-
dia,* and in the western parts of the Punjáb he is called Mochi whenever
he is, as he generally is, a Musalmán, the caste being one and the same.
The name Chamár is derived from the Sanskrit charmakira or “worker
in hides.” But in the east of the Punjáb he is far more than a leather-
worker. He is the general coolie and field labourer of the villages; and
a Chamár, if asked his caste by an Englishman at any rate, will
answer - Coolie” as often as “ Chamár.”† They do all the begár, or
such work as cutting grass, carrying wood and bundles, acting as watch-
men, and the like ; and they plaster the houses with mud when they
need it. They take the hides of all dead cattle and the flesh of all cloven-
footed animals, that of such as do not divide the hoof going to Chúhrás.
They make and mend shoes, thongs for the cart, and whips and other
leather work; and above all they do an immense deal of hard work in
the fields, each fainily supplying each cultivating association with the
continuous labour of a certain number of hands. All this they do as
village menials, receiving fixed customary dues in the shape of a share
of the produce of the fields. In the east and south-east of the Punjáb
the village Chamárs also do a great deal of weaving, which however is
paid for separately. The Chamárs stand far above the Chúhrás in social
mujer mother. They cance from Delhi and
Sherring has a long disquisition on the Chamár caste, which appears to be much more
extensive and to include much more varied tribes in Hindustan than in the Punjáb.
† Why is a Chamár always addressed with "Oh Chamár ke" instead of “Oh Chausr,"
as any other caste wonld be ?
"Oh Chlamdiután thun minute poubo much more



148
Chamúr synonyms.
position, and some of their tribes are almost accepted as Hindus.* They
are generally dark in colour, and are almost certainly of aboriginal
origin, though here again their numbers have perhaps been swollen by
members of other and higher castes who have fallen or been degraded.
The people say:
Karić Brahman, got Chamár
In ke sath na strie pár.
“Do not cross the ferry with a black Bráhman or a fair Chamár,"
one being as unusual as the other. Their women are celebrated for
beauty, and loss of caste is often attributed to too great partiality for
& Chamári.
The traditional origin of the Chamárs is that Chanu (or Cbanwe) and
Banu were two brothers: the former removed a cow's carcase with his
own hands and go Banut out-casted bim. In Kapúrthala, however,
another version is current, and according to this Gát told his brother
Met to remove a carcase and then declined to associate with him for
doing so, and the Mirási who witnessed the incident, took Gát’s part.
From Mat are descended the Chamárs.
Synonyms.-It is difficult to say what are the real synonyms of Chamár.
The term Chúhrá-Chamár is often used to denote the group formed by
the two castes, just as Mochi-Juláhá is used, but it does not imply that
the two castes are identical. Just as the Muhammadan Chamár is
styled Mochi so the Sikh Chamár is called RAMDÁSIA (99. v.). In Sirsa
a Chamár is called Meghwal as a compliment, but opprobiously he is
styled Dhed or Dheph, a term applied to any low fellow'. The
Meghwal' claim descent from Megh-rikh who was created by Narain.
Groups. The Chamárs are divided into several sub-caster. In the
Eastern Punjab there appear to be at least five true sub-castes which
do not intermarry These are in order of precedence :
i. Chándor, said in Delhi to trace its origin from Benares, possibly
from some association with Kabír. It is the principal sub-
caste in Hissár, including Sirsa, and its members do not tan,
leaving that to the Chamrangs and Khatíks, and working only
in prepared leather. See also under Meghwal.
ii. Raidási or Rabdási, named after Rai Dás Bhagat, himself a
Chamár, a contemporary of Kabír, and like him a disciple of
Ráinánand. It is the prevalent sab-caste in Karnal and its
neighbourhood.
iii, Jația, found in greatest numbers about the neighbourhood of
Delhi and Gurgaon. They work in horse and camel hides,
which are an abomination to the Chándari, probably as baving
the foot uncloven; and are perhaps named from the word jat
*The Chamárs will eat food prepared by any tribe except the Khákrob (Cbóhra), Banjar,
Pánsi and Nat Smoking is only allowed among themselves and they will not ont or
drink from a Dhobi, a Dúm or a Nilgar (indigo dyer). [Kurnál).
+ Banu or Banwe here would appear to be the eponym of the Bánia caste, wbich is said
to still worubip an ár and a rambi at weddings.
I A Dúm witnessed the occurrence, and 80 to this day no Obamár will eat or drink
szom a Dúm or Mirási's hands,
& The Dhe appears to be a separate caste in the Central Provinces, though closely allied
with the ChamáThe Dhed is also a large tribe in Kachh and Sindb, also called Bhambi.



The Chamár sub-castes.
149
a camel-grazier. On the other hand, they aro said to obtain
the services of Gaur Brábmans, which would put them above
all other Chamárs, who have to be content with the minisatrtions
of the outcast Chamárwa Brahman.
iv. Chainbár, the prevalent sub-caste Further west about Jullundur
and Ludhiana.
V. Golia, lowest of all the sub-castes, indeed Golia is the name of
a section of many menial castes in the Eastern Punjab, and
in almost all cases carries with it an inferior standing in the
caste.
Further west, in Nábha, the sub-castes are, however, said to be four
iu number, viz. :-
1. Búna (Búpia).
2. Chamár,
3. Chaınárwa,
4. Chanbar (sic) }
who touch unclean things.
The Búna appears in Ludhiána as the Búnia, a Sikh Chamár, who
having taken to weaving ranks higher than the workers in leather. The
Rahtia* is also said to be a Sikh Chamár who has taken to weaving,
but many Rahtias are Muhammadans.
Territorially the Chamárs in Pațiála are divided into two groups which
do not intermarry and thus form sub-castes. These are the Bágrí, or
immigrants from the Bágaſ, found in the south-east of the State,
and the Desi.
Among the Desi iu Pațiála two occupational groups are found, riz..
the Chamárs who make shoes, and the Bonas, the latter sub-caste
being weavers of hladkets by occupation and Sikhs by religion.
The Jíad account divides the Chamárs into 5 sub-castes, viz., Rám.
dási, Jatiá, Chámar (sic), Páthí and Raigar, but it is not clear whether
these are occupational or territorial or sectarian groups. The Nábha
account says they are divided into 4 groups, viz., °Clánwar, Jatia,
Babunia (?) and Chímar (sic). The Cháņwar are again divided into
two sub.castes (?), Cháņwar proper, who are Sultánís by religion and
workers in leather; and the Bunas (or blanket-weavers) who are Sikhs.
of Gurú Govind Singh. The Bonas are not found in the south-east.
The Jatiás (descendants of Jatti, wife of Rámdás) are found only in
the south-east and are regarded as inferiors by the Chanwars, who do
not drink or smoke with them. A curious story is told of the origin
of the Jatias, connecting the name with jhant (pubes). No Chánwar
Chamár would give the Jatias' forefather a girl to wife, so he married
a Chúhşa's daughter, but the piheras were not completed when a dispute
arose, so the Chúhras and Jatias performed half the pheras outside and
the rest inside the house until recently. The Jatia tan horse and camel
hide, while the Chanwars of Báwal only tan the skins of kine, which
the Jatiás refuse to touch.
ccount saysupational or territoriad Raigar, but it'is castes, viz., Ra
into Chånwar anets by religiosilkhe
atias Fame wichtious sit
atlaseras were a siri pubes told
* In Sirsa the word seems to be applied to the members of any low caste, such as Chamár
or Chúbța. Mr. Wilson, however, had never heard the word used. In Patiala it is said to
be applied to a Sikh Chamár.



150
Chamár gots.
The Bahmnia also claim descent from a wife of Rámdás, and wear the
janeo and thus assert their superiority over other Chamárs, but they
are not found in Nábba.
The Bilái is apparently the village messenger of the Delhi division.
He is at least as often a Chúhra as a Chamár, and ought perhaps to be
classed with the former. But there is a Chamár clan of that name who
work chiefly as grooms.
The Dusádh is a Púrbi tribe of Chamárs, and has apparently come
into the Punjab with the troops, being returned only in Delhi, Lahore,
and Ambála,
Of the above groups it is clear that some are true sub-castes based
on occupation, while others like the Búna are merely occupational
groups which may or may not intermarry with other groups. This differ-
entiation of the groups by occupation is most fully developed in the
eastern and sub-montane tracts, where the Chamárs form an exceedingly
large proportion of the population and are the field-labourers of the
villages. But in the central districts their place in this respect is
taken by the Chúhra. In the west, too, the leather-worker, like all
other occupational castes, is much less numerous than in the east.
The weaver class, on the other hand, is naturally least numerous in
the eastern Districts, where much of the weaving is done by the leather-
working castes. And, when the Chamár sticks to leather-working in
the eastern Districts, he is apparently dubbed Chamrang or Dabgar,
just as in the Punjab proper a Chamár who has adopted Islám, and
given up working in cow-hide becomes a Mussalman Khatík tanner.
The gots or sections of the Chamárs are very numerous, and some
of them are large. They include the Chauhán and Bhatří gots*
(numerous in the central and eastern Districts, especially Ambála) and
Badhan..
. Ghameri,
Mahmi.
Bains.
Hír.
Phúndwál.
Batoi. ..
Jal.
Sindhú.
Bhati.
Kathána.
Of these eleven gots all but the Kathána are found in the Jullundur
division.
The Chainárs are by religion Hindus or Sikhs.
Owing to the fact that the famous bhagat Rámdás was a Chamár
by caste, many Chamárs are Rámdásiast by sect, and of this sect again
some are also Sikhs.
Rámdás was a descendant of Chanu. His mother, Kalsia, was child.
less, but one day a fagir came to her and she gave him flour, in return
for which he promised her a son. On bis return his gurú cross-ques-
tioned him, as he was unable to pronounce the name 'Parmeshwar, and
learning of bis promise declared that, as no son had been bestowed on
Kalsia in her destiny, the faqir himself must be born to her. So he
Weri,
i
* The two most numerous gots among the Mochis also. They may of course have adopted
these got names from the Rájputs, as Bains and Sindhú may have been brrowed from
the Játs.
4 The Rámdásia also claim descent from Rámdás. The Rámdásia (Sikhs) take the
pahul from Chamárs, and drink amrit at their hands. The Dlazbabi take them from the
sweepers' hands. (Kapurthala).



ChamarwaChanál.
151
was reborn as Ramdás, who is called Raidás in Báwal. As his mother
was a Chamári he refused her breasts, until his gurú bade him suck.
One day when placed by his mother at a spot where Ráma Nand used
to pass, he was touched by that teacher's sandals, and when he cried
out was told by him to be silent and repeat' Rám Rám. Thus was
supernatural power bestowed upon him,
Contrary to the Chamars' customs Rámdás wore a janeo, sounded a
conch, and worshipped idols. The Brahmans appealed to the magis.
trate, whereapon Rámdás cast the idols into a tank, but they returned
to him, whereas the Brahmans failed in a similar test. Again, cutting
his neck open ,Rámdás.exbibited 4 jitneos, of gold, silver, copper and
thread, typical of the 4 yugas. Thenceforth he was known as &
famous bhagat.*
Chamár women wear no nose-ring, but among the Búnas it is worn
by inarried women, not by widows. The Chárimars of Bawal do not
wear gold nuse-rings, and all the Chamárs of that locality avoid
clothes dyed in saffron, and the use of gold. They also use beestiags
only after offering it to the gods on the amáwas.
CHAMARWÁ BRAHMAN, the Brahman of the Chamárs : see Brahman. Also
a sub-caste of the. Chamárs in Nábha (see Chamár).
CAAMBIÁL, a Rájput sept (Hindu) of the first grade-deriving its name
from Chamba State : of. Mandiál; Jaswál, Pathánia, etc.
CAAMER, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHAMANG, the caste or class which in Kanáwar works in leather, correspond-
ing to the Chamár of the plains.
CAAMKANNI, or Pára Chamkanni, a small tribe of GHORIA KHEL Patháns,
found in Kurram.
CHAMRANG, (a synonym of Chamár, chiefly returned from Patiala and
Siálkot), the term chamrang is probably a purely occupational term.
The chamrang does not stain or dye leather, but only tans it: fr.
rangná (which as applied to leather means to 'tan '). The chamrang
moreover only tans ox and buffalo hides, and does not work in the
leather which he tans. By caste he is probably always & Chamár.
In Delhi the term appears to be practically a synonym for Khatík
(q. v.), but the Khalík is, strictly speaking, a carrier, not a tanner, and
a Muhammadan, while the chamrang is a Hindu. In Gujrát also
the chamrang is identical with the Khatík.
CHANYE, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CAANÁL, or probably Channál, from Chándála, whom all Sanskrit authorities
represent as begotten by á Súdrá on a Brahman. His occupation is
carrying out corpses, executing criminals, and other abject offices
for the public service.t The menial class of Kángra and Mandi,
corresponding to the Dági in Kullú and the Koli in the Simla Hills;
* In Jind the Rámdásias aro the dominant group and form a sub-caste, which has 9 gots :-
Berwál.
Máhí
Siddhu.
Chauhan.
Sanyár.
Linh-mát.
Gorú.
Laria.
| Lokra,
† Colebrooke, Essays, 274,



152
Chanan_Chandyt.
the Chanáls in Kángra appear to be inferior to the Kolis of that Dis-
trict, and some of them at least will not touch dead cattle, or mix on
equal terms with those who do. On the other hand, in Kullú Saraj
some of the Chanáls rank below Kolis. Dági-Chanál is a very common
term for the caste: and in Kullú it appears to include the Nar. Yet
a Chanál of Mapdi State will not intermarry with a Dági of Kullú.
The Chopál is also found in Chamba, where the proverb goes : Chanal
jetha, Ráthí kanetha, 'The low caste is the elder and the Ráthí the
younger brother,' doubtless pointing to a tradition that the Chanál
represents an earlier or aboriginal race. See the articles on Dági and
Kõli.
CHANAN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Coánanyí, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHAŅBAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHANDÁL,-Ní, an outcast, one of lowcaste. Punjábi Dicty., p. 187. See
Chanál.
CHANDAR, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery
and Sialkoț. Cf. Chaņdaſh.
CHANDARH, a Ját sept, found west of the Ráví : Punjábí Dicty., p. 187.
Doubtless=Chádhar or Chhadhar, (9. v.)
CHANDARSEVI, syn. Parbhú Káyasth : one of the two classes of Káyasthas
(q. v.)-found in the Deccan.
CHANDBAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHANDEL. One of the 36 royal (Rájput) races, and fully described in Elliott's
Races of the N.-W. Provinces. It is not impossible that they are the
same stock as the Chandál, outcasts where subjects, Rájputs where
dominant. They are returned chiefly from the Simla Hill State of
Bilaspur. Rajput tradition in Karnál avers that the Chandel once held
Kaithal and Sámána, but were driven towards the Siwáliks by the
Mandhárs. It would be interesting to know how this lowest of all the
Rájput races finds a place among the Simla States, and whether the
ruling family of Bilaspur is Chandel.
CHANDER, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
CRÁNDIA, (1) a Baloch tribe : see Baloch : (2) Chándia, a Ját clan (agricul.
tural) found in Multán.
CHANDJA, a sept of Rajputs, found in Kahlúr and descended from Gambhíı
Chand, younger son of Pahar Chand, 24th Rájá of that State..
CHANDLA, a Rájput sept, of the second grade, said to be found in Hoshiarpur.
Probably = Chandel(a), q. v.
CHANDRAR, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery. Donbtless =
Chhadhar.
CHANDU, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur and in Multán. In the
latter District it is classed as Ját.
CHANDUR,-WAB, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery and
Amritsar.
CHANDYí, a Kambob clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.



Cháng–Chanmar.
153
CHÁNG, 8ee Chang.
CHÁNGALÁ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Craggar, fem. -í, -iání, ní (Chhanggar in Multiini). The Changgars are
outcasts of probably aboriginal descent, who are most numerous in Gujrát,
Amritsar, Lahore, Ferozepur, and Faridkot, but especially in Sialkot
and they say that their ancestors came from the Jammu hilis. They
are originally a vagrant tribe who wander about in search of work;
but in the neighbourhood of large cities they are settled in colonies.
They will do almost any sort of work, but are largely employed in
agriculturo, particularly as reapers; while their women are very generally
employed in sifting and cleaning grain for grain-dealers. They are all
Musalmáns and marry by nikuh, and say that they were converted by
Shams Tabríz of|Multán, who hade their ancestor, a Hindu Rájput, support
himself by honest labour and husk the wild sawánk in the jungles because
it was good (changa). Their clans are said to be Phúlan, Chauhan,
Manhás, and Sarohe.* Their women still wear petticoats and not drawers;
but these are blue, not red. They are exceedingly industrious, and not
at all given to crime. They have a dialect of their own regarding which,
and indeed regarding the tribe generally, the late Dr. Leitner published
some interesting information. He says that they call themselves not
Changgap but Chúbna, and plausibly suggests that Changgaſ is derived
from chhánna to sift. It has been suggested that Changgar is another
form of Zingari ; but Dr. Leitner does not support the suggestion.
Cuangri, a sept of Kanets which holds Phera and half Dharath parganas
in Kuthár.
Coaní, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHANKAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CHANN, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
CHANNAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Lodhrán tahsil, Multán District.
They are said to be connected with the Jhakkars and other tribes
in the couplet :-
Jhakkar, Channar, Kanjun, Nun teatera,
Hin Ráne Shaitán de panje bujh bhará.
All these five clans assume the title of Rána. In Baháwalpur they
are also called Chainun-di and are found chiefly in the kárdárís of
Baháwalpur and Ahmadpur East, as cultivators, and in the Rohi, as
landowners and cattle-breeders. Their septs are: Admani, Rám, Wísal,
Bhojar, and Bharpál, said by some of the tribe to be descended from Pír
Channar, but the more general belief is that the Pír never married and ihat
the Channars are descended from his seven brothers, eons of Rai Sandhíla.
The Channars are, however, believed to be an offshoot of the Malis.
Channar Pír.-Four miles from Derawar, on a hillock, is the tomb of
Pír Channar, or Chanan Pir, son of Rai Sandhíla. Sayyid Jalál visited the
city of the Rai, now in ruins some three miles off, and asked if there was
any Muhammadan in the city, male or female. He was told that there
was none and he then asked if any woman was pregnant. The Rai said
his wife was, and the Sayyid then ordered him to enıploy a Muhanımadan
midwife for the child would be a saint. When the child was born the Rai
* Or, in Kapúrthalá Bhullar, Bhatti, Chauhán, Túr and Khokhar,



184
Channozai-Chaudhriál.
exposed him on the hillock, but a cradle of santal wood descended from
heaven for the child. Seeing this Rai Sandhíla endeavoured to take
the child out of the cradle, but failed, as, whenever he approached, the
cradle rose in the air. When the child grew up, he accepted Makhdum
Jahánián as his Pír, and as he was brought up in poverty so his tomb
is especially efficacious for the rearing of children. The Channar tribe
is descended from the seven brothers of the Pír. Both Hindus and
Muhammadans frequent the shrine, rot or thick bread and meat
being eaten by both as brethren. Hindus are not polluted by contact
with Muhammadans at the shrine.
CHANNOZAí, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Chanon, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CAANWÁL, returned as a Rájput sept in Hoshiárpur.
CHÁNWAN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CHAPPABBAND, Chhapríband. See Chuþrá.
CHÁRAN. C. Bhát.
CHARAN-Dásí, a modern offshoot of the Bairagis, for an account of which
see pages 37-38 above.
Charhová, Charhoá, * (the fem, in Multáni is said to be chhirohí, P. Dicty.,
pp. 195, 226).
The Charhoa is the Dhobi and Chbimba of the Multán division and
the Deraját and not unseldom carries on the bandicrafts of the Lílári
and Rangrez also. In his capacity of washerman he is, like the Dhobi,
a recognised village menial, receiving customary dues in exchange for
which he washes the clothes of the villagers. He is also found in
Bahawalpur, in Gujrát (where he is described as a dyer in reds), and in
Pesháwar. See Dhobi.
CHASTI, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CHATERA, in M. chatrera, see Chitera.
CHATRATH, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Montgomery,
in the latter District they are both Hindu and Muhammadan.
CHATTA, see next.
CHATTAA.- A Ját tribe apparently confined to Gujranwala, in which district
they hold 81 villages. They claim to be descended from Chatta, a
grandson of Prithi Rai, the Chauhan King of Debli, and brother of the
ancestor of the Chíma. In the 10th generation from Chatta or, as other-
wise stated, some 500 years ago, Dahru came from Sambhal in Morádá.
bád, wbere the bards of the Karnál Chaubáns still live, to the banks of the
Chenáb and married among the Ját tribes of Gujranwála. They were
converted to Islám about 1600 A.D. They rose to considerable politi-
cal importance under the Sikhs; and the history of their leading family
is told by Sir Lepel Griffin at pages 402 f of his Punjab Chiefs.
CHATTARBáz, an umbrella-maker: probably to be included among the Tarkháns.
CHATYÁL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CHAUDHRIÁL, a faction or party which is opposed to the Zamíndár (also called
Chaudhri) party in the Chakwal tahsil of Jhelum. Broadly speaking
he washegage menial, apacity of was the handienitán divisi
* (Cf. the Balochi jareodha, clothes-wasber,



Chaudri Chauhan.
155
a full account ses found in Baháwadami. They say
the Chaudhriáls are the representatives of the old talúqdárs, whereas
the Zamindárs represent the new men put in during Sikh rule. The
forner is the more numerous and powerful, but the latter is more
united. Marriages between members of these factions are much more
rare than marriages between members of different tribes. These fac-
tions have ramifications which extend into Pind Dádan Khán tahsil,
across the Sháhpur Salt Range and down into the Shahpur plains. For
a full account see the Jhelum Gazetteer, 1904, pp. 126-8.
CHAUDRI—) A tribe found in Babáwalpur. They have four main septs,
Janjáni, Jasráni, Samdáni, and Dhadáni. They say that their original
name was Salúki,(?) Saljuki. (ii) a faction: i. q. Zamíndár: see
Chaudhriál.
CHAUGHATTA, (1) a Mughal clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar ; (2) a Ját
clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CHAJHÁN, a great Rajput tribe, one of the Agnikulas, and also one of the 36
(royal) ruling races. Tod calls them the most valiant of the whole
Rájput race, and to them belonged Pirthi Ráj, the last Hindu ruler of
Hindustán. Before the seat of their power was moved to Delhi, Ajmer*
and Sambhar in Jaipur seem to have been their home. After their
ejectment from Delhi they are said to have crossed the Jumna to
Sambhal in Murádábád, and there still dwell the genealogists and bards
of the Chauhan of the Nardakt of Karnal and Ambála in which Districts
they have retained their dominant position more than elsewhere in the
Panjáb.
The Chauhans in Ambála claim to belong to the Bachas got and to
be of Surajbansi descent. In this District they hold 169 villages, and
their traditions give them the following pedigree and history:
Rájá Nápak Rao, took Sambhal in Murádábád.
Ralla-kúnd.
Rána Harra $; in the 5th generation founded
Pandri and Habrí, c. 988 A. D.
Rantha.
augha, ancestor
of the Adhoa
Rájputs.
Subbdral,
* The Ambála traditions mention Alal-kundor-puri as their seat before Ajmer was
founded. They also add that Rádá Har Rai founded Júndla in the Pánípat tahvíl: thence
the Chauhan spread northwards. In Karnál their chaudhriáts are Gumthala, Rao Sambhli
Habri and, chief of all, Júndla.
# For the Chaulián migrations and their conquest of the Pundirs see the article on
Rajpats.
Rána Harre also had four illegitimate song, by a Roſni, a Gújarí, a Játni and a Hojámní
respectively. The latter's son, Kawal Ráj, founded á bára, or group of 12 villages, of
Rájputs: the Játnís son, Bhadhi, was the ancestor of the Madhnl Játs. who hold two
báras, one in Kalsora in Thánesar, the other in SabáranpurBut the Karnál tradition is
different. It assigos to Ráná Harrai two Rájput wires and five of inferior status, viz., a
Rośni, whose descendants form the Dopla got of the Roſs, a Játní, a Gújarí, a Jogin and a
Nain. The descendants of the two latter are the Rájputs of Mustafábád purguna in Jigádhri
tabsíl, while the Játní's and Gujarf's progeny appear to have settled east of the Janina.
& Lantha or Ránta was the son of Ráná Har Rai's old age and his step brotbers
disputed his legitimacy. So be appealed to the king of Delhi and his mother said that she
had fed the Ráná og dolah, a fish supposed to possess aphrodisiac qualities. The king
declared that Ránţá 8 sweat would smell of the fish if he were legitimate. He fulfilled the
test and was declared legitimate.



156
Chauhan-Cháula.
Rantha's descendauts drove the Koli Rújputs across tho Tangri, where
they may still be found. Tilok Chand, son of Subh Mal, his descendant,
l'etained 84 out of the 169 Chaubán villages--the chaurúsí; while Subh
Mal's second son, Mának Chand, turned Muhammadan and took tho
pachúsi or 85 remaining. Jagajít, 8th in descent from Tilok Cland,
was Gurú Govind Singh's antagouist c. 1700 A. D. In 1756 his
grandson, Fateh Chand, with his two sons Bhup Singh and Chuhar
Singh, fled from Ahmad Shah Durráni iuto Kotáha where 7,000 Chauháns
were massacred by the imperial forces under the Rai of Kotáha.
In Hissér the true Chauhắns are immigrants and may be divided into
two branches, the Nimrána* and Sidlımukli or, as tliey call themselves,
Bárá ThúlThe Nimránás who are descendants of Rájá Sangát, a
great-grandson of Chabir Deo, brother of Pirthí Rúj, are sub-divided into
two clans, Ráth and Bágauta, both of which came from Gurgaon, the
former tracing their origin to Játúsána. The name Bagauta would
appear to be connected with Bigliota.t
The Bárá Thál had a group of 12 villages near Sidhmukh in Bíkáner,
close to a famous shrine of Gúga.
The Sohu and Chotia Pachádas claim Chauhán descent.
The Chauhans own a few villages to the south of Delhi city and have
a small colony, near Jakhauli in Sonepat talisil, but in this District
they have adopted widow remarriage and are disowned by their fellow
Rájputs, but they are the best cultivators of the tribe, and otherwise
decent and orderly.
In the central and some western Districts the Chanháns are found
classed indifferently as Rájput or Ját, e.g., in Siálkoţ. I
In Amritsar they are classed as an agricultural tribe (Rájpat, Ját and
Gujar), and they are also so classed in Montgomery (Rájput and Ját)
and in Shahpur.
In Baháwalpur the Chauhans have three clans :-Khális ; Hamshíra
[found mainly in Uch peshkúri--they claim that Muhammad Husain,
their ancestor, was Akbar's foster brother (hamshir), but others say they
are Hashmíras not Hamshíras); and Khichchi, who claim to be
descended from Khichchi Khán, ruler of Ajmer 700 years ago, and say
their ancestor founded Shergadh in Montgomery. Few in number they
are confined to the kárdári of Khairpur East, where they are carpenters
and khatiks by trade, though in Multán they are well-to-do landowners.
Numerous Ját and other tribes, comprise Chauhan sections or have
sections which claim Chauhán descent, indeed it would be difficult to
name a large caste in the Punjáb which has not a Chauhan seotion, e.g.
see Chainár. The Kíchi and Varaich are also numerous Chauhan
clans in the Punjáb. For the general history of the Chauhans and
their organisation see Rajput
CHÁULA, Cháwala : lit. a preparation of rice : a section of the Aroras.
* Nimrána is a small state, a fendatory of Alwar, and ruled by a Chauhan family
7 Eliot mentione four tracts, as held by the Alanot Chauhans, viz., Ráth, Bíghota,
Dhundhoti and Chandwar. Of these, Ráth, the largest, lies mostly in Alwar, but it
includes Nárnaul, now ir. Pațiála territory. Bighota lies north of Rátb, abd Dhundhoti
betwCAD Bighota and Hariánn.
I Punjab Cuscomary Law, XIV, p. 2.



Chawa8Chet-rámi.
157
CHAWás, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
CHAWEKá, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Checkí, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CAELA, (i) a disciple ; (ii) a sept of the Siáls, 9. v.; (iii) a fem. diminutive form
(chelri) is used in the sense of 'witch' or malignant female spirit.'
CHEMIYA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHENJí, !?) a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar, (ii) a sept of the
Gil Játs, apparently confined to Hoshiarpur.
CA ET-RÁmí. The name of a sect fonnded by one Chet Rám, an Arora of
Buchboke, which is still the central sanctuary of the sect, though its
monastic headquarters are outside the Taxali Gate at Lahore. Chet Rám
became a disciple of Mahbub Shah, a Jalali faqir, of the Chishtia sect.
After his death Chet Rám slept upon his tomb and there had a vision
of Christ which is described in a Panjabi poem, partly composed by him,
partly by his successors or followers. On his death in 1894 Chet Rám
was cremated and his ashes drunk in water by his enthusiastic dis-
ciples. Before dying he had designated the site of a future Chet-rámi
town to be called Isápuri or "Jesus' town,' and there his bones and
those of Mahbub Shah are to find their eventual resting-place. Re-
garding the creed of the sect Dr. H. D. Griswold writes :*_“The
Chet-rápi sect holds a double doctrine of the Trinity. There is
the Christian Trinity consisting of Jesus, the son of Mary, the
Holy Spirit, and God, which is found in the Chet-rámí creed.
There is also what might be called a Hindu Trinity consisting of
Alláh, Parmeshwar, and Khuda. Alláh is the Creator, Parmesh war,
the Preserver, and Khudá, the Destroyer. This idea is, of course,
based upon the Hindu doctrine of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva as
Creator, Preserver and Destroyer, respectively. The three potencies
of the universe, namely Alláh, Parmeshwar, and Khudá have their
counterpart in the human body, which, from this point of view, is a
kind of microcosmos. There is a generative part corresponding to
Alláh, a nourishing -part (the breast) corresponding to Parmeshwar,
and a destroying part (the head) corresponding to Khudá.” The
Chet-rámís frequently carry a long rod surmounted by a cross, on
which is inscribed their confession of faith. Some form of baptism
also appears to be practised, but they distinguish between the external
and internal rite, and are said to have four kinds of outward baptism,
with water, earth, air and fire. Earth-baptism is used when a lay
member tears off his clothes, casts dust upon his head and becomes
a Cbet-rámí monk, to mark his ronunciation of the world. The monks
are the clergy of the sect, the theory being that 40 persons are always
to subsist on alms and preach the doctrines of Chet Rám. These 40
are called chelas and are addicted to intoxicating drugs. The sect is
probably not very numerous, and it is said to be persecuted by both
Hindus and Muhammadans, though, when a chela begs of a Hindu he
does so in the name of Rám, and when from a Muhammadan in the
pame of Allah and Muhammad. All castes, even the lowest
are recruited, but caste distinctions are at least so far observed that
* In an exhaustive Paper read at the Mussoorie Conference, 1904, which the curious reader
1 may consult for further details and parallels,



158
Chhabata Chhadhar.
each caste of converts eats separately. Three melas are held annually
at Buchboke, one on Poh 1st (January) in memory of Mahbub Shah's
death, another on Jeth 29th (May-June) to commemorate that of
Chet Rám, and the third on Sawan 18th (July-August) in memory
of one Malang Shah, of whom nothing appears to be known except
that he was a friend of Mahbub Sháb.
CHHABALA, see Chhabíhwále.
CHHABÍAWÁLE, a term applied to the Khatrí devotees of Shámj. His Gandia
Ját devotees are called Rang Rangita and his Chándia Baloch worship-
pers are styled Chhabala-both, though still Muhammadans, presenting
offerings to his descendants. (For an account of the Hindu revival in the
south-west Punjab under Bairagi iniuences, by the Gosains Shamji and
his successor Lálji, see Census Rep., 1891, pp. 127-9.
ChəÁBRí, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
ChBÁDHAR. Found along the whole length of the Chenáb and Ravi
yalleys, but far most numerous in Jhang, where they for the most
part regard themselves as Rájputs, the Chhadhars claim to be descended
from Rájá Tur, Túnwar. They say that they left their home in
Rájputána in the time of Muhammad of Ghor, and settled in Baháwalpur.
where they were converted by Sher Shah of Uch. Thence they came to
Jhang, where they founded an important colony and spread in smaller
numbers up the Chenáb and Rávi. Steedman describes them as good
agriculturists, and less given to cattle-theft than their neighbours.
Mr. E. D. Maclagan spells the name Chaddrar, which is undoubtedly
the correct form, and writes :-
is The Chaddrars are Túnwars. Their chief tribes in the Sandal Bár
are the Rajokes, Kamokes, Jappas, Lúns, Pajikes, Deokes, Ballankes,
Sajokes, etc. The Chaddrars of the Bár are said to have expanded
from Dhában, a small rahna or encampment south-west of Khuriánwála.
The Lúns of Awánwála in the Bár say they have been there for seven
generations. At Bajla, rahna there is a separate class of Lúns or
Lúnas called Bála Lúns, who celebrate marriages, wash the dead and
so forth, and act more or less as mullas".
The following genealogy of the Chaddrars is given by a mirásí of the
tribe in the Hafizabad tahsil :-
Pándú.
Gárjan,
Bhin,
Bátísar.
Mándlik.
Túnwár
Anak,
Jodh.
Rájá Ravílan,
Chaddrar,



drare.
Chaddrar ballads.
159
The same mirásí also gave the following cháp or ballad regarding
the great deeds of the Chaddrar:
Datár ugge Mír Braham,
Saith the Mirásí Ibrábím to the generous,
Parh lichár sunáeá ne :
He pronotuces as follows:
Túr phir tawána hoeá.
* Túnwár then became strong.
Jis kul Tárá páeá ne;
From which family. Tárá was born ;
Rájá khúb bhalá Ravílan.
Rájá Ravílan was a fine hero.
Jis Dillí Koț banáeá ne ;
Who built the fort of Delhi;
Dillí Kot bandhá ne kaisa
He built Delhi Fort so
Jo khutba sachch parháeá ne.
That his name of a certainty was sounded
in the Khutba.
Drá jo maidán ditto ne
Secondly, when he had cleared a wide
space (empire),
Chaddrar nám dharáeá ne.
He fixed the name of Chaddrar.
Dhare nám te vaddhe agjó.
His name was established and grew from
day to day.
Alláh Nabi deháeá ne.
He worshipped God and his Prophet.
Bákim á, hakúmat kiti.
A ruler came and ruled.
Mulk sárá kankáeá ne.
The whole country called for help,
Chhattí Paintí te Lúnáke
The Chhattis. Paintís and the Lún country,
Damra ghar dhoáeá ne.
Carried rupees to the home of the Chad.
Bannhi hatth Nakoda lijá
With only half a hand the Chaddrars took
Nakodar
Diniar des niwdeá ne!
And made the Diniar-des do obeisance.
Peihle já Gugiábe hathi.
First they went to Gagiána (in the Bár)
and settled,
Phir Laháur pauhncháeá ne.
Then they reached Labore.
Kharralá nál pea jál jhagrá,
When they quarrolled with the Kharrale,
Takhto Khirral hatáeá ne,
They stripped the Kharrals of their throne.
Modá de Chiniot leóne.
With a push of thə shoolder (i.e., with a
certain amount of trouble) they took Chipíot.
Zor chemgerá láeá ne.
They used more force,
Malil: dacche Khán kuttho me.
They Killed Malik Macche Khán.
Ragrá rok rulláeá ne.
They harried and destroyed him.
Urárpár hukm. Chuddrar dá.
The Chaddrars were rulers on both sides
of the river (Chenáb).
Siálá di kuriá bereá dál chikáeá ne. They put the Siáls' daughters on rafts and
dragged them away.
Ajjún, Cha, Sultána yáge
They cleared a wide road of (i.e., dis-
Dágar ráh ghatácá ne.
Ajjún, Chá and Sultán the rebels.
| Vijah, Vise báo cháye
When Vijjar and Viso (Cbaddrars) grew
to wisdom
Sir chatt? Nabi jhuláeá ne.
The Prophet held his canopy over them.
Hambí nadi Chitrang wasáe,
Hambí (a Chaddrar) lived on the Chitráng
nadi,
Bakhrá púrů páeá ne.
And divided bis share fully.
Jappeá ne bhi rutbá chokhá,
The Jappas' line was also good,
Daftar wále karáeá ne.
And separated off a share.
Dinglián Bulghán Bilochán.
They met the Bulghán Biloches.
Már Biloch vanjáeú ne.
They beat and defeated the Biloches.
Chulhe te ral vandi de saphará.
They fed in common, but tboir share was
divided
Sár garáhi khácá ne.
They fought to their hearts' content,
Mirjú Dhir hoeá kurerá :
Mirza, son of Dhír, was a stalwart man:
Baggá shih chiráeá ne.
He struck tigers.(with his sword).
Nithar, Kálú, Dallú, Mallú mani guwú : I sing of Nithar, Kálú, Dallú and Mallú:
Jouro takht macháeá ne:
They also held power :
Jithe satt shahid akatthe hoe,
Where seven martyrs were together (i.e.,
among enemies),
Othe duddh giáeá ne.
There they gave them milk to drink
(killed them).
Is kul te dátá Núra,
Of this family were the generous Núr,
Gahna, Jáni, Wáchi, Ibrahim Haqqáni. Gahna, Jáni, Wáchu and Ibráhím the
Haqgání,
Jas Mir Fráhím gáeá ne,
I, İbrahim, have song this praise,
persed)



160
ChhajjuChhalapdár,
The Rájoke Chaddrars once got hold of a Mughal emperor's
elephant and yoked it to a well at a place near Khuriánwala, still
called the Háthí Thel. The following cháp on the subject was given
by the Mirási faqir at Shaikh Sábu:-
Malik Dadù bá chái,
Malik Dádú (a Rájoke Chief) lifted his arm,
Indra Rája rís áe.
Indra Rája becamo envious.
Vass baddal káleá !
Kain, o black cloud !
Háthi leá ne khass
He seized the elephant
Maháwat ne máreá.
And killed the mahaut.
Háthi Akbar Bádskáh de,
It was an elephant of the emperor Akbar's,
Itthe chaſe dhámni, Laháur kamánd. llore it grazed on dhaman grass, in Labore
on engar-cane.
Rájú ke Rájoke,
The Rájokes, descendants of Rájú,
Sundh vadąhke'khuhe jutte dánd.
Cut off its trank and yoked it to the well.
CAHAJJU, CAHAJJÚ-PANTHIX sect which exhibits a curious combination of the
Hindu and Muhammadan creeds among the lower orders. It is said to
have been founded by Chhajjú, a bhagat of Lahore, who lived about the
time of Aurangzeb.* His followers burn their dead, but do not throw the
ashes into the Ganges; they take them to a place called Paruají, in Bundel.
khand, where they bury them. They believe in the divine mission of Mu-
hammad, but have no social intercourse with the Muhammadans. One of
their sacred places is Malka Hans, in the Pák pattan ahsíl of Montgomery,
where their mahant, Lachhman Dás, lives, and their'sacred book is kept
in a kind of temple. It is called the Kul Jama Barup, is written in
Bhásha, and its doctrines are based on a mixture of Hinduism and the
Qurán. They also have adherents at Qabúla Tibbi and Harappa, and
are said to be strong vegetarians and teetotallers.
CHUAJķÁ. A tribe of Játs who claim descent from the royal race of the
Bbattis of Jaisalmer. They came to Multán under Rao Kehar, a chief-
tain of their own, and settled there. Kehar is a name of note in Bhatti
annals. One Kehar was contemporary of the Khalífa-ul-Walíd, A.D.
713.7 He and his song advanced the Bhatti kingdom of Jaisalmer.
Another Kehar ruled Jaisalmer in the sixteenth century, and his son
conquered all the Multán country up to the Indus. The Chhajrás
marry their daughters to their own tribesmen only, but receive the
daughters of other Ját tribes in marriage.
CAHAJRA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán tabsíl.
CHHAJO, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Chha Kháng, & caste found in Spiti (from chha, 'owner' and kháng, 'land').
But according to Sir James Lyall kháng means ' house' or 'household,'
not 'land.' Zing means land : cf. Cháhzang.
Chrála, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHHAL'APDÁRS. A sinall community of some 10 houses in Delhi, who say that
they came from the Mewat in Mughal times and that in the United
Provinces they are known as Mujáwars.I Shaikhs Mujáwar and
Qalandar were their ancestors, and so the latter's descendants are
called Qalandars. But this seems to be an absolute fable. That they
came from the Mewát may be conceded, but, in spite of what they
.
* Chbajjú's chaubára is a conspicuous edifice near the Divinity School at Lahore. The
local histories describe him as an Aroſa who worked miracles in that city, but not as
having founded a sect. Chhajjú-panthi would appear to be a local term for the more
general term 'PARNAMI' (q. v.).
t Walíd was Khalifa from 705-15 A, D.: Elliot's Hist. of India, I, p. 428. ..
Ar. lit. a neighbour.' The word is deed in India to delote an attendar tat a shrine,



Chhalapdár rites.
161
say, it is probable that they are Hindu converts to Islám, and that in
their former faith they were temple musicians or wandering ininstrels.
On the conversion of the Mewát their deities were overthrown, but the
spirit of idolatory which remained, and is not yet quite extinct, set up
Muhammadan pirs in their stead, and they found employment in dedi-
cating themselves to these saints. But it is doubtful whether they
were ever really attached to the shrines of the saints to whom they
are dedicated, viz., Khwaja Moin-ud-Din of Ajmer, Badí-ud-Din
or Madár Sáhib,* or Saiyid Sálár Masaúd Ghazi, known as the
* Bálá Miyán. The Mujáwars belonging to these shrines are of
authenticated descent and certainly, of higher status than the
Cbhalapdárs, who derive their name from chhalap, the musical
iostrument which they carry and which is in itself a sign of low
social status. That they call themselves Mujáwars may be taken
as a mere attempt to claim a higher origin, though they certainly
take upon themselves certain duties connected with the anniversaries
of their saints, especially at Delhi, where they are to be seen
wandering from house to house as harbingers of the approaching
ceremonies, and singing songs to the accompaniment of the chhalap
in praise of their saints. The anniversary of the first-named saint,
who is the most reverenced of them all, is held at Ajmer from
the 1st to the 6th of Rajab, when thousands from all parts of India
gather at Ajmer. When there were no railways, people used to start
on this journey weeks and even months beforehand, so that the
month preceding Rajab actually came to be called the month of
Khwája Moin-ud-Din. On the 14th, 15th, and 16th of this month
large numbers from the Mewát, and the countryside generally, assemble
at the Qutb, 11 miles from Delhi (which, as the name signifies, is the
shrine of Khwaja Qutb-ud-Dín, the chief disciple of the Ajmeri
Khwája) for three days, which are observed as great holidays. On the
16th this great concourse forms a huge caravan which sets out on its
way to Ajmer. Even now the journey is mostly performed on foot,
though bullock carts are also employed, chiefly for the women. The
sight is picturesque and interesting, young and old being dressed in
their best attire; trains of chhakras (country carts) which carry the
thousands of women and children, singing to the accompaniment of
drums, flates and all kinds of instruments. A conspicuous feature of
the procession is the red and green banners and Augs, called chharián
(lit. sticks'), to which the three days' gathering at the Qutb owes its
name of the chharion ká mela or "fair of the flags', which are
more precisely called Khwaja jí kí chharián. In the preparation and
erection of these flags and in the ceremonies connected with them
the Chhalapdárs are the principal actors. The flags look like so many
* On the first day of Jamádi-ul-awal, also called the month of Madár, when the banners
or chhariáns of Madár were erected under the walls of Delbj the Chhalapdárs, accom-
panied by a band of drummers, used to appear with Madár's banner before the ornperor
in his court of private audience, and on their arrival he came out of the palace and his
attendants used to give them trays of inalidah, the Chhalapdárs in return placing a baddi
or garland on the emperor's body in memory of the Saint Madár. Prayers were then
offered in the uame of the saint and the malídah was doled out to all present. After
the king gave thọ Chhalapdárs a standard from the top of which hung a cloth called
pharaira, embroidered with gold (called tásh or tamámi, eto.) to the loose ends of which
were attached silver oups or kațoras. This standard was given to the Chhalapd árs in order
that it might be presented at the convent of Madár Sábib in the king's behalf.



spet Qutb is mble process the noise au of every
162
Chhatapdár rites.
standards, distinguishing the various bands and contingents which form
the great Khwaja's camp or lashkar. They are gaudily draped, have
guilded tops, and are garlanded with flowers, which have peculiar
names. The cloth, and even fragments of it, after having been once
twisted round the stick are considered to be not only sacred, but
possessed of healing virtues, and are eagerly sought after, especially
by mothers who cause them to be worn by their children, if sick or
otherwise in danger, in order to get them cured. They collect women
of their kith and kin, form a procession headed by the men beating
drums, and follow them singing the Khwaja's praises, till they reach
one of these flags, to which they make offerings of sweetmeats, pice
and cowries and sometimes even ropees, the whole being the per-
quisite of the Chhalapdárs, who are in proprietary charge of the sticks.
A portion of the sweetmeat, after it has been offered, is returned to
those who bring it and also distributed among any others present.
Sometimes this ceremony is performed at the house of the child's
parents, in which case the Chhalapdár takes his stick or flag there and
the rite is gone through midst the singing of the child's relatives and
with great festivities. In some cases the ceremony of patting on the
garlands and draping a child in the cloth of a flag is repeated yearly
during its minority, or until the term of years, for which its parents had
vowed to perform it, has expired.
For three days the scene at Qutb is most noisy and the din of the vocal
and instrumental music of innumerable processions passing through
the streets and crossing each other is epbanced by the noise and rowdy-
ism of the jumpiog Darweshes called Qalandars. In front of every
shop and place where a rustic family is staying during the fair, as well
as around every stick or flag erected by Chhalapdárs, groups of these
Qalandars may be seen marking time with their feet which movement
by degrees rises into high jumps. Their choras, * while they are thas
jumping, is
Mast Qalandar! Allah hi degá ! !
Támbe ká paisá! Allah hi dega !!
Dudh malidah ! Allah hi dega !!
Dham Qalandar! Dudh malídah!! Allah he dega !!!
and so on.
“O Darwesh free and drunk! God will give it! Copper coin! God
will give it! Milk and malídah! God will give it ! Jump Qalandar!
God will give milk and mdlidah! (lit., a sweet dish).”
This is repeated again and again until the shopkeeper or the person
or family addressed, gives them something in cash or kind taking
which they move on to jump before others.
In all the songs sung by the Chhalapdárs, and others generally, on this
occasion the Khwaja's praises are the principal theme. The following
which forms the burden of a popular song is given here as a speci.
mun :-
Mere dil daryáo Khwaja ! Tere jhalare pe lagi hai bhir: “My bounti.
ful river-like Khwája! Look what a concourse of people (with eager
prayers) has assembled at thy jhalara."
* Sung in a loud and emphatic voice.
† Jhalára is a large spring at the shrine of the Khwaja at Ajmer.
g det ser o move on



Chháligar---Chhaner.
163
thing
uthi ceremonie.ceed thity.
The second fair of flags is held in honour of Madár Sáhib below the
walls of the fort or red palace of Sháb Jahán in Delhi. It is similar to
the one described above, with this difference, that it is less attended
and the flags are taken to the tomb of the saint at Makkinpur. One of
the songs (or sohlás as they are called) sung by the Chhalapdárs which
refers to Madár Sábib is :-Lei to chaloji bálama Makkinpur ? In this
song a newly married girl implores her husband to take her with him to
Makkinpur. These fairs are especially popular among the women.
The third fair is held in honour of Bálá Míyán' Saiyid Sálár Masaúd
Gházi, who is said to have lost his life in one of the early wars of the
Musalmans with the idolatrous Hindus. He was youug and about to
be married, but fought bravely and died in the hour of victory. As
in the case of the second fair, the chharián are erected under
the walls of the Delhi Fort. One of the songs sung in praise of Saiyid
Salár runs:-Merá nit banra Sálár bálá ! Bálá merá jágo ná: "My
bridegroom ever young, the young Sálár, why does he not awake?”
The Chhalapdárs say they have no chaudhri, but a panchayat system
is iu vogue among them. A transgressor is punished with a fine of 10 or
12 annas with which sweetmeats are purchased and distributed among
the panchs. In extreme cases he is punished by temporary excom-
munication. Marriages are confined to the community. The nikáh is
in vogue, but the bride's dower does not exceed the legal minimum
under Muhammadan Law. The ceremonies connected with birth
and marriage, such as sachaq, chauthi, etc., and those observed till 40
days after death are the same as those of the other Delhi Muham-
madans. Widow remarriage is not unlawful, and a deceased brother's
widow may be taken in marriage. Some of the Chhalapdárs' songs are:
(1) Sung on the bridegroom's side :- Apne Haryále bane pe main
chun chun wárún gé kalyán! Merá jiwe bana! Apne Haryale bane pe
main, etc. “I will pick the choicest flowers and shower them upon my
dear bridegroom, the beloved of God! May he live long."
(2) Sung on the bride's side :-- Meri acchchi bano schág banri ! "My
good, and of her husband most beloved, bride!
(3) Sung at a birth:--Aye lál re tere háth men jhunjhuna. «O my
pretty little baby, with a rattle (jhunjhuna) in thy hand."
One of the ceremonies observed prior to birth is beld when the
woman has been enceinte for 7 months. It is called sath wánsá or the
custom of the 7th month.'
The Chbalapdárs say that they also sing the praises of Saiyid Ahmad,
surnamed Kabír.
CHHÁLIGAR, a syn, for Bázígar, used in Siálkot.
CAHAMIA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CHHANA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Multán.
CARÁN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CHHANER, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,



164
Chhangar--Chházang.
CABANGAR, M. Changar, q. v.
Chuánt, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
CHHAPERA, a synonym, rarely used, for Chhápegar or Chhímba, qi V..
CHHATHA, Chhatta, see Chatha.
CHHAȚȚA, a tribe of Muhammadans found in Montgomery and, 28 Játs
(agricultural), in Amritsar. Probably identical with the Chatta.
CHHÁZANG.-A term confined in the Punjáb to the Buddhists of Spiti, among
whom caste was said to be unknown. It includes all the land-owning
classes of Spiti, where everybody except Hesís and Lohárs owns land.
The Chházang are by nationality Tibetan, or as they call them-
selves, Bhoti, and Chahzang means the land-holding class, and the people
towards Tibet, Ladakh, and Zanskár are known as Chhazang. It
appears to be used in a very wide sense to mean all who speak Bhoti,
just as Monpa means the people that do not know,' that is, the
Hindus.
Mr. A. H. Diack, a high authority on Spiti thus described the
tribal system in that country, where four grades of society are re-
cognised :-
“(). Jo or Tso*-This is a title enjoyed for his lifetime by one who
marries the daughter of any high-class family, such as that
of the Nono of Špiti or the Thakur of Láhul, or any family
of equal importance in Ladakh or Tibet.
(ii). Lonpo.--This term is applied to the class not so high as the Jo
or as low as the Chhá-zang. Lonpo means 'minister' and
is an hereditary title and office. Lohrag and Da-tong-kar-
po (Dhongrukárú) are said to be synonyms for Lonpa.
(iii). Chha-zang.-The word means 'middle-class,'t good
position') as opposed on the one hand to 'Tarap,'or high-
class, such as members of the family of the Nono of Spiti,
and on the other to 'Marap,' or 'low class,' which includes
the blacksmiths, Hesís, etc.
(iv). Lobon.The word means' teacher,' and is probably the des-
cription given of himself by some wandering Tibetan
pilgrim. There was some difficulty in ascertaining the
caste' of Tibetan pilgrims at the census of 1891. They
treated the question as a joke, and returned themselves
as "stones," or articles of wearing apparel, I and the like.
Tribal distinctions are recognized in Spiti, the chief being the
following :-(1) Nandu, (2) Gyazhingpa, (3) Khyungpo, (4) Lon.chhenpo,
* See under Nono for the precise meaning of this term. Mr. Diack also added that the
samo name is borne by the lady whose marriage has invested her husband with the title,
but the feminine form is generally jo.jo. The children of the union do not enjoy the title.
Jo and Tso (Cho) are synonyms. This however is contradicted by later information from
Spiti. (See under Jo,
+ Mr. Diack refers to the Census Report of 1881, § 562, and apparently accepts the
derivation (given therein) fr. a zang 'land,' cháh 'owner.' But 'land' = shing, and
owner' is dagpo in Spiti, and the derivation appears to be untenable,
I Using family names, probably.



Social grades in Spiti.
165
(5) Hesir, and (6) Nyekpa.* Marriage is forbidden within the clan but
one clan intermarries freely with another. A woman on marrying is
considered to belong to her husband's clan and the children of both
sexes are of the clan of the father. The tribes (ru'wa) are not
local; members of each may be found in any village. The members,
phaibat, of the clan, wherever they may live, inherit in preference
to the people of the village, in default of natural heirs. The Lon-
chhen-pas and the Gyazbingpas are considered somewhat superior
to the others, but my informant, a Spiti man, says that in his country,
as elsewhere, wealth is the real criterion of respectability.” More up
to date information shows that Mr. Diack using (no doubt) a Láhula
interpreter has confused Láhula and Spiti nomenclature: the true
class distinctions are these
Ladakh.
Láhul.
Spiti.
1.- Royal or noble ... ... rgyalrig8) ... Jorigs ... ... Nono.
II.- Upper official class ... rjerigs ... Lonrigs or Lon. Lonpo.
chbeppo.
III.-Farmers or yeomen ... h(mangrigs) ... h(mangrigs) ... Chházang.
All these three classes are Nangpa or Chajang, 'insiders.' All
below them are styled Pipas in Spiti, Chipas in Lábul, or Tolbeyrigs
in Ladákh,
Mr. Francke describes the Spiti people as divided into three main,
classes : Nono, Chajang and PipA. The older accounts averred that
only in the lower parts of Spiti must menials provide their own stems
for the common huqu, which in the upper part was used by all without
distinction of rank. This is now indignantly denied, and, it is said,
a nangpa or commoner will carefully remove the stem from a nono's
(noble's) pipe and 'start' it with his mouth. As a fact any one, except
à pipa, may use an ordinary man's pipe, and the nonos admit that if the
stem were used by an inferior it would only be necessary to wash it.
The tendency is, however, for etiquette to become stricter. Just as
the Lahulas have advanced an utterly unfounded claim to be Kanets
by caste, so the people of Spiti, in the presence of Hindus who
pride themselves on their caste rules, pretend to caste distinctions of
their own.
As to the clan system, it must be borne in mind that the thing most
necessary to ensure in the Buddhist world is that when a man dies
there shall be some one ready to prepare his body for burial. Persons
reciprocally bound to perform the last offices for each other are called
phuspun (father-brotherhoods), as well as phaibat, as they are in
theory of the same ru'want as it is called in Spiti. From this origin
have sprung the clans which are found in every grade of society.
Such are the Stond-karpo, the Rumpu, the (b)Lonch ben pa or 'great
ministers,' the Khyung-búba, the (r)Gyansheba and the Dreba, all
found at Dhankar. Even the pipa class has clans. In marriage the
such aprang the chemu wa, t as its well as phalach other an Persons
* For an explanation of these Tibetan clan names see TIBETAN.
+ The word means 'bone ' and is pronounced rúspa in Ladákh.



166
Chhatar Chhimbá..
bone must be avoided, just as in Kullú and the Simla Hills the
haddi ka nátha is the exogamous limit. It almost goes without saying
that the bone brethren' or phaibat inherit in preference to any one
ontside the clan.
CHHATAR, a tribo of Muhammadan Játs found in Gujrát. Its eponym came
from Uch, but his real name is anknown. As a child he visited his
maternal grandfather's house and was weighed against shces (chhatar)
whence his nickname.'
CHHECHHAR, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CABELAR. A small clan of Játs whose principal settlement is Chhelar in
the Nárnaul tahsíl of Nábha. They revere Bhagwán Dás, a Hindu
saint of Mukla in that State, and shave their children at his shrine,
They avoid tobacco.
CHHIBBAR, (1) a section of the Muhiál Brahmans ; (2). sept of Kanets; who
give their name to the Chhibrot pargana of Keonthal, to which State
they migrated from Chittor in Rájputána with its founders. Cf. Balbir
CHHIBÍ, Chhíbú, syns. of Chhímbá.
Chímá. The Chhimbá, Chhípí or Chhímpí, called Paungar or Chaphoa in
Dera Ghází Khán, is by occupation a stamper or dyer, but he also turns
his hand to tailoring or washing. Hence the caste includes the Darzís
or tailors, the Lilárís or dyers, and the Dhobís : * also the Chhápågar.t
By religion the Chhímbás are mainly Hindus and Muhammadans.
The Chhímba is properly a calico-printer, and stamps coloured
patterns on the cotton fabrics of the country, and he is said occasionally
to stamp similar patterns on paper, but he can hardly be distinguished
from the Dhobi. Besides printing in colour, he dyes in madder, but as
a rule, in no other colour. He is purely an artisan, never being a
village menial except when a washerman. In some places, though
not in all, Chhápegar is used to distinguish those who ornament calico
with patterns in tinsel and foil only.
The Hindu Chhímbás are divided into two sub-castes, which may not
intermarry, but may eat and smoke together. These are the Tank
and Rhilla. And in Patiala the Hindu Dhobís are said to form a third
sub-caste. S
The following legend explains the origin of the two former sub-castes :
At Pindlapur in the Deccan lived one Bámdéo, who one night enter-
tained Krishna and Udhoji, but, as the latter was a leper, the villagers
ejected them. They were in máyavi form, and at midnight both of them
vanished, leaving Bámdeo and his wife asleep. Udhoji hid in a shell
(Dipe), and when Bámdeo went to wash clothes he found the shell and
placed it in the sun. It produced the child Námdeo who was fostered
* Sháhpur.
See below
*Io Patiala the Hindu Dhobi gots are not separately given, and it is said that the Tank
print cloth, while the Rhillas are tailors and the dhobis washermen.
& But in Máler Kotla the Tank olaim to be of higher status than the Rhilo, mud do
not even eat or smoke with them.



The Chhimbá gots.
167
by Bamdeo's wife. Námdeo taught his son Tank, and Rhilla, his
daughter's son, the arts of dyeing, printing and washing clothes.*
Territorially the Hindu Chhímbás have various divisions, e.g., in Siálkot
they are divided into the Lahori and Dogsa sub-castes, which are
said not to intermarry and which have separate gots.t In Amritsar too
is found a Lahori group, which is also called Chhápágar or Nawandhi.
It is looked down upon by the other Chhímbás, who avoid all social
relations with its members, because at weddings, it is said, they make a
cow's image of flour and shoot arrows at it.
The Lahori gots are :-
1. Pharwain.
3. Takhtar.
2. Bagri.
4. Ded.
The Dogra gote are :-
1. Karakú.
5. Rihania :
9. Chebhe.
2. Panotra.
6. Pabe.
10. Bhumral.
3. Dowathia.
7. Saragra.
11. Tanotra.
4. Andh.
8. Bagri.
The Hindu Chhímbás have few or no special observances at births, etc.
Ip or near Delhi after childbirth, if the child be a son, the mother wor-
ships at a well to which she is taken 15 days after her confinement, accom-
panied by the women of her quarter of the city who sing songs as they
go. The mother does obeisance to the well, and throws some sweet stuff
and rice into it.
Hindu Chhímbás never grind turmeric, except at a wedding. They
will not make baris, and their women avoid wearing kánch bracelets
and the use of henna.
The Hindu Chhímbáss observe the ordinary Hindu rites, but Námdeo,
the famous bhagat, is their patron saint, for no better, reason than that
he was himself by caste a Chhímbá. Accordingly they pay yearly
visits to his dera at Ghamán near Amritsar, and offer him a rupee and
nárial at weddings. Sikh Chhímbás appear to favour the tenets of
Gurú Rám Rai.
The Muhammadan Chhímbás have several territorial divisions, e. 9.,
in Patialall there are three, the Sirhindís (endogamous), the Deswáls
and Multánís, 1 who intermarry, as is also the case in Jínd. In Gurgaon
the Desí Chhímbás are said to be converts from the Tank and Rhilla
* But in the Máler Kotla version it is said that originally the Chbímbás were a
homogeneous caste, until Námdah (.deo) Chhímbá took unto himself two wives, one a
Chhímbá womun, the other of another caste. From the fornier sprang the Tank, from tho
latter the Rhilla. Hence the Tank assert tbeir own superiority as they are pure
Chbímbas, while the Rhilla are not.
+ But the Bagrí is found in both groups.
I Nawandbí = of low degree.
$ In Gurgaon Hindu Obhímbás, who are very superstitious, worship & Muhammadan'.
grave, real or supposed, calling it a Sayyid's grave, offering a cock in the Sayyid's namo
or a dish of boiled rice at his grave, lest their domestic ponce be distarbed.
ll In this State the Muhammadan Dhobís are said to have five sub-castes-Lahori,
Sirhindi, Multání, Purbia and Deswál. Of these the two latter only are found in the Stato.
They do not intermarry. The Deswál sections are :-Goráyá, Chaubán and Kanakwálmall
Rajput clans.
i For some of their sections see the Appondis,



168
Chhinam Chhúl.
sub-castes, while the Multánís are of the Inroi clan which dwelt in the
Indus valley and took to printing calico.
In Leia the saint of the Chhímbás is Ali, the dyer, who is said to have
been a pupil of Luqman and to have invented washing and dyeing.
Before beginning work they invoke him saying :-F kr ustád Luqman
hakim, hikmat då badshah, Ali rangrez, charí rahe deg ; i. 6., 'Luqman
the physician is the priest and teacher, the king of craft, and Ali is
the dyer. May his bounty endure for ever.'
Most Muhammadan Chhímbás are Sunnis, but in Karor some fow are
Shias.
The Muhammadan Chhímbás have a loose system of panchayats, and
in Dera Ghází Khán elders or mahtars are elected by the caste.
The women of the Muhammadan Chhímbás and Dhobís wear no
laung (nose-ring), no ivory or glass bangles, or blue clothing. The
Muhammadan Chhímbás will not make achárn or baria ? and avoid
building a double hearth.
Choíná, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur: also classed as Ját, (agricul-
tural) in Amritsar. The Chhína are undoubtedly distinct from the Chíma
Játs of Sialkot and Gujranwala, though the two tribes are frequently con-
fused. That there are Chhína in Sialkot appears from the fact that the
town of Jámki in that District was founded by a Chhína Ját who came
from Sindh and retained the title of Jám, the Sindhi equivalent for
Chaudhri. Yet if the Chhína spread up the Chenáb into Sialkot and the
neighbouring Districts in large numbers, it is curious that they should
not be found in the intermediate Districts through which they must have
passed. The Chhina are also found in Mianwali and in Baháwalpur
State. In the latter they are mainly confined to the Minchinábád
kárdári, opposite Pákpattan, and there have three septs, Táreka
Mahramka and Azamka, which own land. Other septs are tenants.
Their genealogy gives them a common origin with the Waţtus :-
Uchohir.
,
Jay-Pál.
Ohbína.
Raj.Pál.
Wattú.
Pheru, 18th in descent from Chhína was converted to Islám by Báwa
Farid-ud-Din of Pakpattan. The Chhínás are courageous and hard-
working, but they are also professional thieves, though they will not
steal from Sayyids, faqirs or mírásís, dreading the abuse of the latter.
Though a small tribe in comparison with the Wattús they will not allow
the latter to get the upper hand, and if they steal one buffalo from the
Chhínas, the latter endeavour to retaliate by stealing five from the Wattús.
CHHIŅBÁ, fem. an see Chhímba, P. Dicty., p. 225.
CHHOLIÁNA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Canon, CABONI, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Coxoşí, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Caúl, or JAÚL: & synonym for Malláb, used in Hoshiarpur. .



The Chibh feudal system.
169
CAIBH.-A Rajput tribe confined, in the Punjáb, to the northern portion
of Gujrat ander the Jammu Hills, but also found in the hills above
that tract which helong to the Kashmír State. It gave its name to
the Chibhál, the hill country of Kashmir on the left bank of tho
Jhelum nyer along the Hazára border, though it appears to no
longer occupy those hills. The Chibh claim to be an offshoot,
at luast in the female line, of the Katoch of Kangſa, and their eponym
Chibh Chand is said to have left Kángra 14 centuries ago* and settled
at Maghlora near Rhimbar in the Jammu Hills, receiving from Rája
Sripat of Bhimbar his daughter's hand, with part of his country as her
dower.t
The first of the tribe to become a Muhammadan was one Súr
Sadi, who died a violent death in Aurangzeb's reigu. He is
still venerated as a martyr, and the Muhammadan Chibh offer
the scalp locks of their male children at his tomb, till which ceremony
the child is not considered a true Chibh, nor is his mother allowed
to eat meat.
The Chibhs had at one time or another a very curious and interest-
ing feudal organisation, survivals of which are still traceable in its
social gradations. Succession to the throne of the Bhimbar kingdom
was governed by the rule of primogeniture, but younger sons had a
right to a share and so it would seem that the ráj was divided into four
mandiam-Mahlot, Bundála, Kahawalián and Rajal, and each of these
great fiefs was held by a " prince of the blood," the eldest son being
Řájá of Bhimbar. Hence the ráj always remained in the family of the
Ghaniyál Chibhs, descendants of Ghani Khán, grandson of Shadi Khán,
the ancestor of all the Muhammadan Chibhs, who is identified with the
martyr Súr Sadi.
The ráj also contained four strongholds, garhs, viz., Dewa, Butálá,
Ambarial and Kadhála. These garhs were distinct from the mandis
and were in charge of the Ghaghiál, descendants of Ghaní Khán's
cousin. Their precise relation to the mandis is by no means clear,
but both garhs and mandis owed allegiance to the Rájá; though their
holders collected their own revenue and were independent in the
management of their estates. But whatever the precise nature of
the mandis and garhs may have been, there were also minor fiefe,
which were bestowed on younger sons : these were 84 in number, at
least in theory, and were called dheris. The dheris again were classed
as dheri álá, i.e., a fief with a few villages attached to it, and dheri adná
or one which had no dependent villages.
Accordingly the Chibhs are divided into three grades, Mandiál, Garhiál
and Dheriál, but now-a-days it is difficult to say who are Mandiál and
who Garhial, though feeling still runs high on the point. Further
the Ghaniáls are all regarded as standing high, since they once held
the ráj, though some have now slender means, and they will not give
gh on 40 are misl, Garhia
* Tradition makes Chibh Oband's father, Náhar Chand, Rájá of Kángļa, & contemporary
of Taimur, but the Chibhál (Jhibhál) was already known by that name to Taimur's his.
torian.
of A variant says that the Chibhs are of Persian descent. Na'mán, a descendant of Darah,
Sun of Bahman, ruled Khurásán, and his descendant, Gauhar Shah, came to the Deccan and
married Náhir Chand's daughter and their son was named Abdár Chand, a Hindu, His
descendant N&bir Chand became Rájá of Kángra.



170
2.
The Chilásís.
daughters to others. The Samwálias, Miánás and Malkánas are also
regarded as superior for unknown reasons, and either intermarry or
seek matches for their girls among the Sayyids or Gakkhars whom they
admit to be their superiors. Lastly the Chibhs descended from Shadi
Khán have 14 septs, mostly named after eponyms :-
1. Rúpyal, descended froin Rúp Khán.
Barwing, from Baru Khán.
3. Daphral, from Daphar Khán.
4. Dhurál, from Dhaur Khán.
5. Darwegal, from Darwash Khán.
6. Jaskal, from Jaisak Khán.
7. Maindal, from Jalal Dín, Kiás Dín and Bhura Khan.
8. Baranghahia, from Baren Khán.
9. Samwália,
10. Link, from Muhammad Khán.
Malkáná, )
12. Malkal, from Malik Khán.
13. Ghaniyál, from Ghani Rhán.
14. Ghaghiál, from Ghaghi Khán.
Carlisi, an inhabitant of Chilás, which is a canton comprising six valleys
in the Indus Kohistán. Its inaccessibility has given the Chilásís a
spirit of independence and a distinctive character among all the Kohistán
communities. Though but somewhat recent converts to Islám they are
more fanatioal than any other Dard community, and being Sunnis, every
Sbia who falls into their hands is put to death, without the usual alter-
native of slavery. Once subject to Gilgit, the Chilásís were notorious
for slave-raiding and they once repulsed a Sikh expedition from Kash-
mír. In 1851 they were however subdued by that State and now give
no trouble to its government. The love of music, dancing and polo, so
general in the Indus Kohistán, is unknown in Chilás. Tradition says
that the whole of Shinkári was once ruled by a Hindu rújá, Chachai by
name, from Chilás, which, on his death without issue, became divided
into republics, as it is now. Later, a civil war between two brothers,
Bot and Matchuk, ended in the expulsion of the latter's adherents, and
the Botě are now the most prosperous family in the canton. Tradition
also preserves the name of Naron, the old tutelary deity of Chilás. Each
· village is independent and has a number of elected elders, jushteros,
but they are the servants, rather than leaders, of those whom they re-
present. The elders are mostly occupied in the details of the village
administration, but all matters are discussed in the sigas or public
meeting, whose decision is announced by them. If several villages
combine to hold a sigas, each appoints a jushtero, and after the general
discussion, which is as open as that at a village sigas, a loud whistle is
gived, after which none but the representative jushteros are permitted
to speak. The elders' decisions about land disputes are respected,
but criminal justice is administered by the mullahs, who profess to
follow the Muhammadan Law, but who are really guided by ancient
custom, which is very strong in some villages. Murder is rare and is
generally regarded as a tort to be avenged by the nearest relation.
The blood feud is however not allowed to continue indefinitely and
after a time the parties are made to swear peace on the Qurán.-
· Biddulph, Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh, pp. 17 and 18.



Chiliss-- Chishti.
171
Curlstyling themely s Originally, say the Indus in vain their neighbours off
CUILISS, a group of some 200 families, so called by their neighbours, but
styling themselves Galis, found scattered in the Kohi tract in the
Indus Kohistán. Originally, say their traditions, settled in Buner, they
inigrated to Swát and thence to the Indus in vain attempts to escape
conversion to Islám. They are looked up to by their neighbours and
occupy, as a rule, the best land in the country. Probably an off-
shoot of the Torwálik, they doubtless derive their name from Cháhil,*
the principal village in Torwal: Biddulph, Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh,
pp. 10,69
Chíma. One of the largest Ját tribes in the Punjab. They say that some
25 generations back their ancestor Chíma, a Chauhan Rajput, fled from
Delhi after the defeat of Rai Tanúrat (Prithi Ráji, by Muhammad of Ghor,
first to Kangſa in the Delhi District and then to Amritsar, where his
son Chotú Mal founded a village on the Beas in the time of Ala-ud-dín.
His grandson was called Rána Kang, and the youngest of his eight
sons, Dhol (the name appears among the Hinjra), was the ancestor of
their present clans-Dogal, Mohtil, Nagára and Chíma. The Chíma
have the peculiar marriage customs described under the Sahi Játs, and
they are said to be served by Jogis instead of Brahmans, but now-a-days
Bhania purohits are said to perform their ceremonies. They are a
powerful and united tribe, but quarrelsome. They are said to marry
within the tribe as well as with their neighbours. The bulk of the
tribe embraced Islám in the times of Fíroz Shah and Aurangzeb, but
many retain their old customs. They are most numerous in Sialkot,
but hold 42 villages in Gujranwala, and have spread both eastwards and
westwards along the foot of the hills.
It is noteworthy that the tribe takes its generic name from its young.
est clan, and is descended from Dhol, a youngest son.
Another genealogy is -
Rai Tanúra.
Chotú Mal
Chima (4th'in descent).
Audhan.
Audhar.
Bávan, founded Chíma.
The Sialkot Pamphlet of 1866 makes them Somabansi Rájputs,
claiming descent from Ráma (sic) Ganj. It also says they follow the
chúndavand rule of inheritance.
CAIMA, a Hindu and Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Mont-
gomery.
CHIMNE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
CHINA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
Chíná, see Chhína.
CAISHTI.--The Chishtis are by origin one of the regular Muhammadan
orders. They trace their foundation to one Abu Ishaq, ninth in
succession from Ali, the son-in-law of Muhammad, who migrating
* But Chiliss also occurs as a proper name in Hurza: Ibid, p. 27.
+ Sic : for Pithora.



172
The Chishti sect.
froin Asia Minor, settled at Chisht, a village in Khurásán and
became the teacher of a large body of Musalmáds.* One of his
successors, Khwaja Mnín.ud-din Chishti, a native of Sanjar in Persia,
migrated to India in the time of Ghiás-ud-din Balban, settled in Ajmer
and established the order in India. His khalifa or immediate successor
was Khwaja Qutb-ud-din Bakhtiár Káki, who is buried near the
Qutb Minár at Delhi,t and his successor was the celebrated Bábá
Farid Shakarganj, whose shrine is at Pákpattan in Montgomery. The
surname of this saint is said to be derived from the fact that, owing
to the purity of his body, all he ate became sugar : if we may trust
another story, he “ nourished himself by holding to his stomach wooden
cakes and fruits when he felt hungry. This miraculous but inexpensive
provender is still preserved." An immense fair is held at his shrine
each year, and the object of every pilgrim who attends is to get through
the narrow gate of the shrine on the afternoon or night of the 5th
Muharram. The saint is adored by Hindust as well as Musalmáns,
and to be a disciple of Bábá Faríd does not necessarily imply being
a Chishtí; and, again, the descendants of this saint and his relations,
carnal or spiritual, have formed themselves into a separate caste of
men who are found on the Sutlej in Montgomery and who, though
bearing the name of Chishtí, are now in all respects an ordinary
lay caste, quite apart from the religious order of the same name.
Bábá Faríd had two disciples : one of these was Ali Abmad surnamed
Sábir, whose shrine is at Píran Kaliar near Rurki, and whose followers
are known as Sábir Cbishtís; the other was the celebrated and
mysterious Nizam-ud-dín Aulia (1232-1324 A. D.), around whose tomb
are collected some of the choicest monuments of ancient Delhi, and
whose disciples are known as Nizámís.
The Chishtís in repoating the profession of faith lay a peculiar
stross on the words Illalláhu, repeating these with great violence, and
shaking at the same time their heads and the upper part of their
bodies. The sect is said to be specially affected by Shías, and it is
distinguished by its adoption of vocal music in its religious services.
The members of the order are worked up by these religious songs
to a high pitch of excitement, and often sink down exhausted. They
frequently wear coloured clothes, especially clothes dyed with ochro or
with the bark of the acacia tree. Their principal shrines in the
Punjab are the tomb of Nizam-ud.dín Aulia at Delhi, the khángáh
of Míran Bhik in Ambála, the shrine of Bábá Farid at Pákpattan, and
tho khángah of Hazrat Sulaiman at Taunga in Dera Ghazi Khán.
In Baháwalpur the Chishti sect has in modern times shown great
vitality. Shaikh Táj-ud-din Chishti was a grandson of Faríd-ud-dín
Shakar-ganj and his descendants founded the village of Chishtián in
that State. His shrine is also called Rozá Táj Sarwar. Many tribes
accepted Islám at his hands, especially the Sodhá and Ráth, and this led
to war with the Rájputs of Bíkáner. The saint on going forth to battle
* * The Chishti or Chi htia is an order of Muhammadan faqirs founded by Banda Nawar
who is buried at Kalbargah."-Punjab Census Report, 1881, Section 518.
+ See the interesting account of this saint given in the late Mr. Carr Stephen's Archæology
of Delhi, p. 174 seqq. He is the patron saint of the Afgháng...
In Gurgava tike, shrine of Shaikh Ahmad Chishti is mainly frequented by Hindus.
vented by the Archeologi



The Chishti revival.
173
pitched a tag on top of his house and told his women-folk that as long as
the flag stood they would know he was safe. Unfortunately the flag
was accidentally knocked down and the women prayed for the earth to
swallow them up as the saint had commanded. Their prayer was grant.
od and they were engulfed, only the edges of their shawls remaining
outside. A tower was built on the spot and at it women still make vows.
One of the women, however, a Bhatti by tribe, did not join in the prayer
and was not engulfed, but made her escape. Hence the Chishtís do not
marry Bhatti women to this day. Near this shrine, at the tomb of
Khwaja Núr Muhammad, stood five large jand trees, called Panjan
Píran de jand, or the jand trees of the five pírs. Under their shade
Báwá Nának once sat and prophesied that he who should obtain
possession of it would indeed be blessed, for it was a part of paradise.
Muhammadans hore sacrifice goats and sheep after offering prayers for
rain. Hindus offer a covering of chintz for the restoration of health,
and sugar and boiled grain for rain.
The Chishti revival. The decay of the movement headed by Báwa
Farid Shakar.ganj had become marked, when Khwaja Núr Muhammad
Qibla-i-Alim, a Punwar Rajput of the Kharral tribe, revived it. This
saint was a disciple of Maulana Fakhr-ud-dín, Muhib-ul-Nabi, of Delhi,
He had miraculous powers and once saved the sinking ship of one
of his disciples,* his spirit being able to leave his body at will. He
had promised another disciple to pray for him at his death,
and though he pro-deceased him, re-appeared in the flesh and fulfilled
the promise. It would seem that in a sense the rise of the Chishti
sect marks an indigenous revival of Islám, ander religious leaders
of local tribes, instead of the older Sayyid families. Thus the Baloch
tribes on the Indus are often followers of the Chishti saints, but
even the Sayyids of both branches recognize their authority.
The four chief khalifas of Qiblá-i-Alim were, Núr Muhammad II, of
Hájipur or Nárowala, in tahsil Rájanpur, Qázi Muhammad Agil, of
Chácharán Sharíf, Háfiz Muhammad Jamál, Multáni, and Khwaja
Muhammad Sulaimán Khán, of Taunsa Sharíf, in tahsil Sanghar. Khalifa
Muhammad Aqil was a Qoraishi and one of his descendants, Shaikh
Muhammad Kora, founded the religious tribe of that name. Muhammad
Aqil's shrine was at Kot Mithan, but, when Ranjit Singh conquered the
Deráját, Khwaja Khudá Bakbsh, Mahbub Iláhi, his descendant, settled
at Chácharán Sharif, which may now be regarded as the head-quarter of
the Baháwalpur State religion. Muhammad Aqil displayed many
miracles and in his old age, owing to his spiritual enlightenment, had no
shadow ; so he used to come out of his house on dark nights only, in order
to conceal his sanctity. A cloth (lungi) which passed through his body is
kept as a relic to this day. One of his khalifas was Maulvi Sultán Mahmúd
whose shrine is at Khán Bela. This saint was fond of missi, a kind of
bread, of fowls, and of snuff, in his lifetime; so these are offered
at his shrine-a clear instance of anthropolatry very similar are
the offerings made to Bírs. The Súfis,.,or devotees of the Chishtia
sect, have a number of songs (káfis) which they consider the food of
the soul. Their principal poets are Budha Shah, Ghalám Shah, a
*Cf. the story of the Sikh Gurú Rám Pái given at section 82 of the Punjab Census Report,
1902.



174
Chitragupta-bansi-Chitráli.
Sindhi, and Khwaja Ghulam Farid, late sajjada-nishin of Chácharán
Sharif. The Chishtis, generally, are devoted to music. Outwardly the
followers of the sajjada-nashins of Chácharán are distinguished by a
special head-dress, the Chácharán-wala top, or hat, which is shaped
like a mosque and is about 15 inches high, covering the ears and
Deck.
As a caste the Chishtís appear to be absorbing the Naqshbandis, many
of the Qadrias and other Súfi sects, especially in the south-east Punjab.
Like the Bodlas the Chishtís were till lately wholly nomad. They take
Rájput girls to wife. There is a saying "You can tell a Chishtí by
his squint-eye" ; but the origin of the saying is unknown.
CAITRAQOPTA-BANSI, one of the two classes of the Káyasths q. v., found in
Northern India.
CAITRÁLI,* an inhabitant of the State of Chitral. The Chitrálís are divided
into three classes-Adamzádas, Arbábzádas and Faqir-Miskín. The
first-named are divided into some 23 clans including the Karon, the
family of the Mihtar of Chitral, whence it is also called Mihtari. The
other Adamzáda clans are
Khushwakté. ti. . . Atam Begé.
Shighniye.
Razá.
Mazbé.
Dachmané.
Muhammad Begé. 55 Mirasiye.
Khoja.
Sangalé.
Khoshal Begé.
Byuriye.
Kusbamadé,
Khasbé.
Roshte.
Khaniye.
Muofiat Kháné.
Kisrawe.
Burúshe.
Bayike.
Zundre or Ronos.
Qabile.
From the Ronog families the wazírs are generally, but not always,
chosen. The Ronos are most numerous in Yassin, Mastúj and Chitral,
and are found, though in decreasing numbers, as one goes eastward, in
Någar, Gilgit, Punyál, etc. In Nágar and Yassin they call themselves
Hara or Haraiyo, in Wákhán and Sarikul Khaíbar-Khatar, and in Shigh-
nián Gaibalik-Khatar. Wherever found they are held in great respect.
Three principal traditions as to their origin exist, (1) that they descend-
ed from Zún, Rono and Harai, the three sons of Súmálik who ruled in
Mastúj before the Shahrei dynasty of the Shins was established; (2) that
they are of Arab descent, from Muhammad Hanífa, son of Ali; and
(3) that they came from the ancient principality of Rajauri, near Punch,
and are descended from three brothers, Sirang, Súrúng and Khangar
Phutúto. In appearance generally taller than the other inhabitants of
Chitral, with rather high cheek-bones, oval faces not thickly bearded, and
fairly developed features, some of them resemble high-class Rajputs in
type. They give daughters to the ruling families, and the children of
* Chitral, Cbitrár or Chitlár, as it is also called, will be found described in the Imperial
Gazetteer.
† The Khushwakté were rulers of Mastúj and conquered Yássin. Descendants of the
Katore and Khush wakté families are alike called Mihtarjao or Mihtarbak, i.e. sons of
Mihtars.
Called collectively Shah Sangale: descended from the common ancestor and founder
of the Kators and Khushwakté families.
& Rono appears to be unquestionably the same word as Ráná, the change from á to o
being very common. Philological speculation might suggest the following equivalents :
Súmálik = Siwálik; Zún = Jún, the aborigines of Biélkot; Khatar » Kshatriya, Khattri,
or Khattar (in Káwalpindi).



Classes in Chitrál.
175
really intar. the Ada
such marriages can succeed to all the honours of the father's family. They
all give daughters to Sayyids, and the Zundre of Chitral do not refuse
them to the Patháns of Dir. In their turn, however, they take wives
from both Shins and Yeshkuns, and the children of such wives rank
as Ronos and, if daughters, can marry into ruling families. Occasionally
Rono women are given to Shins and Yeshkuns, but this is a penalty for
misconduct when they cannot find husbands in their own class. Ruling
families give daughters born of slaves or concubines to Ronos, but not
those born of lawful wives.*
The Arbábzádas and Faqir-Miskin are really one and the same, but
the latter are the very poor class, some having barely sufficient to live on.
The Kho, who inhabit the whole of Kashkar Bála, the Lut-kho and
Arkari valleys and the main valley down to Drosh, are by class Faqír-
Miskín. They call the country Kho also, and divide it into Túri-kho
(Upper), Múl-kho (Lower) and Lut-kho (Great). They speak Kho-wár,
and are divided into classes such as the Toriye, Shire, Darkhane and
Shoháne, but have no caste distinctions. The YIDGRAL are also classed
as Faqír-Miskíns, as are the KÁLÁSH and BASHGÁLI Káfirs, DANGARIKS,
Gabr, and Siáh Posh-all broken tribes subject to Chitral.
The Arbábzádas are really well-to-do Faqír-Miskín who have been
rewarded for services to the Mihtar. Coolies and ponies are furnished
for his service by both these classes, the Adamzádas being exempt, and
this corvée falls very heavily on them.
The Ashima-dek (or more correctly Hashmat-diak), according to
Biddulph, is a large class, ranking below the Zundré and comprising
the following clans :-
Atam Begé.
Dash manné.
Zadimé.
Bairán Begé.
Jikáné.
Májé.
Baiyeke.
Kashé, of Kasb, in Badakhsbán. Shaúké.
Barshiatak.
Koshiál Begé.
Shighnie (of Shighnán).
The term Hashmat-diakt signifies food-giver, and this class is bound to
supply the Mihtar and his retainers with 8 sheep and as many kharwars
of wheat from each house whenever he passes through their villages.
but it pays no other revenue.
In the valley below Chitral, scattered among the villages, a number of
the meaner castes are found, as in the Gilgit and Indus valleys. They are
called Ustáds or "artificers” and include Dartoche (carpenters), Dargere
(wooden bowl makers), Kúlále (potters), Doms (musicians), and Mochis
(blacksmiths). The two latter rank below the rest and only intermarry
among themselves. The other three intermarry without restriction
inter se, and occasionally give daughters to the Faqír-Miskín class. i
Ustads are not found in Kashkár Bálá or Lut-kho.
The physical characteristics of the Chitralis vary little. In appearance
the men are light, active figures from 5' 5" to 5' 8" in height. Thouch
well made they are not, as a rule, remarkable for muscular development.
ny
.
* It is unnecessary to point out the analogies presented by the social system in Chitral
to that which prevails in Kángra, as described by Sir James Lyall in his Settlement Report
on tbat District,
+ From hashmat or ashmat, food, given to the Mihtar and his servants when they are
travelling, by the Arbábzáda class.



176
Dress in Chitral,
Stora of merry-making authority, thousing been guilty of cr
presenting in this respect a marked contrast to the Tartar races, and,
despite their hardy, simple lives, they seem unequal to any prolonged
physical effort. Their constitutions also lack stamina and they saccumb
easily to disease or change of climate. This want of physique is
strongly marked in the Shins. In disposition tractable, good-tempered,
fond of merry-making, the Chitralis are neither cruel nor quarrelsome
and readily submit to authority, though the Arbábzáda class corr pares
unfavourably with the older tribes, having been guilty of cruelties in war,
The women are pleasing-looking when young, but not particularly
handsome. The Khos of Faqir-Miskín statas, however, are Indo-Aryans
of a high type, not unlike the Shins of the Indus about Koli, but better
looking, having oval faces and finely-cat features, which would compare
favourably with the highest types of beauty in Europe. Their most
striking feature is their large, beautiful eyes which remind one of
English gypsies, with whom they share tho reputation of being expert
thieves. They are also proud of their unusually fine hair. The Chitral
women used to be in great demand in the slave markets of Kabul,
Peshawar and Badakhshán. The fairest complexions are to be seen
Among the Búrish of Yassin and Hunza where individuals may be found
who might pass for Europeans, and red hair is not uncommon.
In Chitral, as in some of the valleys to the westward, many customs
have in part disappeared under the influence of Islám.
The usual dress in Chitral, as in Yassín, Hunza, Nágar, Sirikot,
Wákhán, etc., is a loose woollen robe, for which those who can afford it
substitute cotton in summer. This is of the same cut as the woollen
robe, but has quilted edges, worked round the neck and front with silk
embroidery. When first put on the sleeves, which are very full, are
crimped in minute folds, right up to the neck, giving the wearer
a clerical appearance. Boots of soft leather are also worn. As in
Wákhán and Sirikot the men wear small, scanty turbans, not the
rolled cap of Gilgit and Astor. The women wear wide trousers, over
which is a loose chemise of coarse-coloured cotton stuff, fastening in the
middle at the throat, and coming down to the knees. The opening is
held together by a circular buckle, from which hangs a curious
triangular silver orament called peshawez, that varies in size
according to the circumstances of the wearer. Round the neck are
generally one or two necklaces of silver beads with oval silver medallions,
and a piece of carnelian or turquoise set in them. They also wear a
loose woollen cap, generally of dark colour such as brown; but this
kind of cap is now confined to women of the lower classes residing in
the upper valleys; and Chitrali women of the better classes wear
embroidered silk caps. In the Shín caste unmarried women are
distinguished by a white cap, which is never worn by married 'Shín
women.
Both men and women wear numbers of charms, sewn in bright-
coloured silk, and suspended from the cap or dress by small circular
brass buckles. Some of the buckles are very tastefully worked. A
curious kind of cloth is sometimes woven out of bird's down. That of
wild fowl and of the great vulture (G. himalayensis) is most generally
used. The down is twisted into coarse thread, which is then woven like
ordinary cloth. Robes made of it are very warm, but always have a



Customs in Chitral,
177
fluffy uncomfortable look, suggestive of dirt. They are only made in the
houses of those in good circumstances. The pashm of the ibex is also
in great demand for warm clothing, but it never seems to lose its strong
goaty smell.
Whon young the men shave the whole top of the head from the fore-
head to the nape of the neck, the hair on both sides being allowed to
grow long and gathered into a single large curl on each side of the
neck. The beard is kept shorn.* Youths of the better class only shave
the top of the head for a breadth of two inches in front, tapering to half
an inch behind. Those who cannot boast long locks dress their hair
into numerous small cork-screw ringlets all round the head-an ancient
Persian fashion.t On the approach of middle age the whole head is
shaved in orthodox Muhammadan fashion and the beard allowed to grow.
The effect of the long-flowing locks reaching to the waist is often ex-
tremely picturesque.
The mode of salutation between equals, on meeting after a prolonged
absence, is graceful and pleasing. After clasping each other, first on one
side and then on the other, hands are joined and each kisses the other's
hand in turn. When the meeting is between two of unequal rank the
inferior kisses the hand of the superior and ho in return kisses the for-
mer on the cheek in the ancient Persian fashion. I
In Chitral and Yassin, as in Shighnán, Badakhshán, Wákhán, Gilgit
and Hunza a chief's visit to a chief is celebrated by tho kubah, an
observance thus described by Biddulph :-"On arrival, the visitor is con-
ducted to the Shawaran, and the followers of both chiefs show their
dexterity in firing at a mark get up on a tall pole, from horseback, while
galloping at speed. After this a bullock is led out before the guest,
who draws his sword and does his best to cut its head off at a single
blow, or deputes one of his followers to do so, and the carcase is given
to his retinue.”
In the Khowar tongue the term " uncle” is applied to the brothers of
both father and mother without distinction: but aunts on the mother's
side are styled “ mother” which may point to polygamy as the ancient
custom of the Khos. 1 Marriage of a widow with the husband's brother
is common, though not compulsory.
Cases of infidelity are extremely common, and the men show more of
the jealousy of their wives usual in vlder Muhammadan communities.
In case of adultery the injured husband has the right to slay the
guilty couple when he finds them together, but should he slay the one
and not the otber he is held guilty of murder.** When conclusive
proof is wanting in a trial before the wazír, guarantee is taken for the
* These fashians have also been adopted by the Baltis in Báltistán.
† Biddulph cites Rawlinson's Ancient Monarchies, IV.
* Biddulph cites Strabo, Bk. XV, Ch. 3, 20.
Ś In Nágar it is customary to kill the buffalo with an arrow. .
11 Polo ground : 80-called in $bine. In Chitráli it is called jináli. .
T Maulavi Ghuláw Muhammad however notes that the mother's sister is called bial
** This is the rule in Sarikul and Wákhán as well as south of the Hindu Kúsh,



178
Chitráli games.
future by the accused placing his lips to the woman's breast, and so
sacred is the tie of fosterage thus created that it has never been known
to be broken. The husband has however a right to both their lives.*
The custom of fosterage is maintained among all the ruling families
of the states of the Hindu Kúsh and its ties seem stronger than those of
blood kinship. When a child is born it is assigned to a foster-mother
and brought up in her house, so that frequently the father does not see it,
till it is six or seven years old.t The fortunes of the foster-mother's family
are unalterably bound up with those of the child and should exile bo
his lot they accompany him. On the other hand if he rises to influence
his foster-father is generally his confidential adviser and his foster-
brothers are employed on the most important missions.
Friendship too is commonly cemented by the milk tie. If a woman
dreams that she has adopted any one, or a man dreams that he has
been adopted by any woman, the tie is created in the manner,
already described as in vogue to make the woman tabu to the man.
Not many years ago this custom was very common, though it is falling
ioto disuse. I A young couple at marriage sometimes induce a friend
to become their foster-father, and the tie is ratified when they eat
together : bath being seated opposite each other, the foster-father,
seated between them, takes a piece of bread in each hand and
crossing his arms puts the bread into their mouths, taking care
to keep his right hand uppermost. Marriage between foster-kindred
is regarded as incestuous. Among the Hashmat-diak the tie of fosterage
is formed in a peculiar way, for in order to strengthen tribal unity it is
customary for every infant to be suckled in turn by every nursing mother
of the clan. In consequence there is a constant interchange of children
going on among the mothers.
Polo is the national game and is called ghál in Chitral where
it is played in a special way. Shooting from horse-back at a gourd
filled with ashes, or at a small ball, hung from a pole 30 feet high,
is also practised. Dancing is the national amusement, several different
steps being in vogue, each with its special air. Avinost all these
commence slowly, increasing in pace till the performer is bounding
round the circle at top speed. In Chitral and Yassin the Hashmat-diak
affect to despise dancing, but the rulers keep dancing-boys for
their amusement. Singing is common and the Khowar songs, which
are mostly amatory in character, show a more cultivated taste than
those in the Shína tongue, the music of the language and the better
rhythm of the verse entitling them to the first place in Dard poetry.
The Chitralis are noted for their swordsmanship, which has gained
many a victory over matchlocks.'
seustomary for en consonante
s and is called ghorse-backed high
reasing in
Chitrál and
hoop dancing-
* But if he does not kill them and intends to divorce bis wife, or if his wife or daughter
bas been enticed away by some one, he can take as compensation some or all of the
seducer's property. This form of divorce is called in Sbiná pito phare bák, i.e., words uttered
while turning his back towards tbe assembly, as by turning bis back he signifies his accept-
ance of compensation,
4 The Rájá of Baehahr observes a similar custom.
İ Milk from a woman's breast is esteemed a sovereign remedy for cataract and other
eye-diseases. Its use establishes the milk-tie for ever afterwards...
$ In Gilgit, Xunza and Nagar the songs are generally of a warlike nature and colebrate
the deeds of different princes.



Chitráli festivals.
179
The Chitral calendar is computed by the solar year, commencing
with the winter solstice; but the months take their names from pecu.
liarities of season or agricultural operations :-
1. Thúngshal or Thhongshal (long 7. Yogh (full).
nights).
8. Múzho Was (middle).
2. Phheting' (extreme cold). I 9. Poiyánáso (the end).
3. Áriyán (wild duck).
10. Kholkremi (threshing).
4. Shahdágh (black mark).* 11. Kishman (sowing).
5. Boi (sparrows).
12. Chhanchori (leaf-falling).
6. Ronzak (trembling-of the
growing corn).
The Muhammadan calendar is, however, coming into use, especially
among the Hashmat-diak class. The Muhammadan days of the week
are used, but Friday is called Adinna.
In Chitrál the new year festival is called Dashti. It corresponds
to the Nost of Yásin, Gilgit, Hunza, Nágar, Ponyál, Astor and Gor,
but no bonfires are lit as in those territories. I
At the commencement of the wheat harvest the Phindik, $ as it is
called in Chitral, is observed. The day having been fixed with reference
to the state of the crop, the last hour of daylight for the preceding
ten days is spent in dancing on the shawaran. At dusk on the evening
before the festival, a member of every household gathers a handful
of ears of corn. This is supposed to be done secretly. A few of
the ears are hung over the door of the house, and the rest are roasted
next morning and eaten steeped in milk. The day is passed in the
usual rejoicings, and on the following day harvest operations are com-
menced. As some crops are always more forward than others, and
ready to be reaped before the appointed day, no restriction is placed
on their being cut; but to eat of the grain before the festival would
provoke ill-luck and misfortune.
Next comes the Jastandikáik || or “ devil-driving" which celebrates
the completion of the harvest. When the last crop of the autumn
has been gathered, it is necessary to drive away evil spirits from
the granaries. A kind of porridge called múl is eaten, and
the head of the household takes his matchlock and fires it into
the floor. Then, going outside, he sets to work loading and firing
till his powder-horn is exhausted, all his neighbours being similarly
employed. The noxt day is spent in the usual rejoicings, part of
which consists in firing at a sheep's head set up as a mark.
A festival called Binisik, "seed.sowing”-somewhat similar to the
Chilli of Gilgit and the Thamer Bopan or “the Tham's sowing” of
Hunza and Nagar-takes place in Chitrál ; but the present ruling
* In allusion to the earth's appearance when the snow melts.
+ Nos means 'fattening,' and alludes to the slaughtering of cattle which takes place. The
first day is one of work, and is devoted in every household to dressing and storing
the carcases of bullocks, sheep, and goats slaughtered a few days previously. This is
done by drying them in a particular way, so that they remain tit for food for several
months. This is necessary because the pastures have become covered with snow and
only sufficient fodder is stored to keep a fow animals alive through the winter.
$ In Chilás and Dárel, too, no boufiros are in vogue at the Daikio, as this fes iival is
there called.
& Called Ganoni in Gilgit and Shágat in Wákhán.
11 The Domenike or "smoke.making " of Gilgit.



180
The Chilli festival in Gilgit.
class having nover identified themselves with their hombler subjects,
the ruler takes no part in it.* The following account of the Chilli
festival in Gilgit is contributed by Maulavi Ghulam Muhammad, author
of The Festivals and Folklore of Gilgit :-
“At night a big goat called asirkhan ai mugar (the goat of the kitchen)
was killed at the Ra's house and a feast prepared by cooking about a
maund of rice and two of fluar. The baking of the bread was com-
menced by an unmarried girl, on whom a gift (khillat) of a chádar head
cover) of longcloth was bestowed, but the other women took up her
task. In former times a big loaf, called bi ai tiki (the loaf of seed), of
& maupd of four, was also cooked on a fire made of straw, and distri-
buted, balf to a man of the Katcbatat family, a fourth to the yarfa
(the Rájás grain collector), and a fourth to the Rájá's ploughman. But
on this occasion throe loaves (two of 20 sers each and one of ten sers)
were prepared. The big loaf was about seven feet in circumference
and four inches thick. One of them, with 24 sers of flour, was given to
the Katobata in the morning, and the other two were divided equally
between the yarfa and the ploughmen in the afternoon. The local
band played all through the night with dancing and singing. At
10 in the morning the people of Gilgit, Barmas, etc., assembled at
the Rá's house where a durbar was observed, i.e., some ghi, chilli leaves
and seeds of the wild rue were placed on an iron pan, beneath which
a little fire was made in order to fumigate the air with its smoke.
The bandsmen and the man who had brought the load of chilli
branches from the jangle, were then each given a khillat of a muslin
turban. A khillat of a turban and a choga (cloak) was also given to
Gholám, one of the Katchata family, whose face was then rubbed
with flour, a small loaf of bread mixed with ghi being given him to
eat. According to custom while eating this he ought to have bellowed
like an ox, but this rite was not observed. A maund of wheat was also
put in a leather bag. The procession was ready to proceed to the
Ra's field by about 11-30. The bag of grain was loaded on the
Katchata, one man took the iron pan used in the Dúban, and another
took the two big loaves, the one uppermost being covered with about
four sers of butter with a pomegranate placed in the middle, while two
chilli branches were stuck in the butter round the pomegranate. Two
men carried a he- and a sbe-goat, while the remainder of the procession
had branches of chilli in their hands; and the procession, with the band
playing in front, started for the Rá's field where the sowing was to be
commenced,
. * In Yásin this festival is accompanied by a curious custom. The charvelu is mounted
om å good horse aod clad in a robe of honour given him by the Mihtar. In this way
he is conducted to the polo ground, where all seat themselves while the music strikes
30, and the tarangfah gallops twice up and dowu the ground. Should any accident happen
to hinn, such as either himself or his horse falling it is regarded as a presage of mis.
fortune to the whole community, and of speedy death to himself. In order to avert evil,
the and his family observe the day as a solemn fast:
+ A family of Gilgit, which in ancient times became such a source of danger to the chief
of Gilgit, that it was attacked and massacred to a man, only a pregnant woman managing to
escape towards Darel. After this the crops of Gilgit did not fourish for several years, and
adanyal (soothsayer) said that its fertility depended on the Katchata family, and that until
a man of that clan was brought there to commenco the seed-sowing the crops would never
fiourish. After a great search the son of the woman who had escaped towards Darel was
found and brought to Gilgit. On his return the crops gave a gooo outtura.



Chohang- Chokáli.
181
nitted. The bathas words and scheers from the people intended
The Katchata then took from a leather bag one after the other 4
handfuls of whieat, in each of which he mixed a masha of gold-dust,
and yave them to Rájá Ali Lád Khan, who threw the first handful
towards the west, the second towards the east, the third to the
north and the fourth to the south. Then the Rá himself ploughed
throo turos in his field with a pair of bullocks which were ready on the
spot. The wazir of Gilgit ought then to have ploughed three turns but
this was omitted. The band then commenced playing and two grey-
beards of good family, with swords and shields in their hands, jumped
forward and began to dance amid joyous cheers from the people. This
dance is called achhúsh meaning' prestige' or 'pomp,' and is intended
to awaken the deity of prestige Meanwhile a be-goat was, according
to custom, killed by a man of a Rono family. This goat is called
achhúsh ai mugar, i.e., 'the goat of the deity of pomp' and is sacrificed
in his honour. Its head and two of its feet were separated and two
men, one with the head and the other with the two feet in their hands,
came forward a od danced amid the rejoicings of the people. All the
flesh of the goat was, as is customary, given to the people of Barmas
village to prepare a feast. A she-goat, called the yadeni ai ayi, i.e.,
* the goat of the deity of drums,' was then killed and given to the bands-
mer). The procession then started back to the Rájá's house where the
feast cooked at night was served. The Rájá had to give some bread
to the niotabars and the bandsmen from his own dish. This custom
is called ishpin; after that the people started for the shawaran (polo
ground) to play polo and make merry. After polo the people again
went to the Rá's house and dined there. The Katchata commenced
ploughing his fields the same day, while the other zamindárs did not
commence work on their fields till the next day."*
CHOHANG, 8 Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CAOHAB, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Chokání, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Mulcán.
* The corresponding Thomil festival of Puniál is thus described by the Maulavi :-
" A very interesting ceremony known as the Thomil used to be observed every year at
Sher Killa, the seat of the Rájá of Puniál, before seed-sowiug. On the day it was to be
observed, the people visited the Rájá in his Fort and got from him 10 or 20 sers of four. A
ori i sers of chi and one big goat. The flour was made into broad thin leaves on which
the ghi was placed. The preliminaries were observed in the Fort. All the persons present
held in their hands a small branch of the holy juniper tree, and those possessing guns
brought their weapons with them. From the gate of the Fort, the Rájá, attended bự his
people marched out to the open fields among their shouts and uries, & band playing various
war tunes. The assembly then gathered in an open field, and the cooked leaves were
presented to the Rájá who tasted one of them. The rest was then distributed among all
present. After the feast prayer was made for an abundant crop. The goat was then
killed, and leaving the carcaso behind, its head was brought before the assembly and
heing greased with butter, flour was sprinkled on it from the forehead down to the nose.
The head was then placed at some distance as a target to be fired at. The firing was opened
by the Rájá who was followed by his notabars and any other who possessed fire-arms.
Whosoever hit the head was liable to contribute a chalar of country wine. Wben this
target practice was over, the assembly dispersed after a nati dance, wbich was given by a
možabar of the Rájá, who used to present him with a torban. In the evening the goat's
flesh was roasted and enjoyed with the wine contributed by those who had hit its head in
the day. Only the people of Sber Killa bad the right to share in this merry-making, no
one else from other villages of Puniál being even allowed to attend it. A few years ago
this ceremony was discontinued, but it was revived this year (1910)."



182
Chokara-Chuhrá.
CAOKAR, Ohhokar, a Gujar tribe, found in Karnál, where they have long been
settled. Immigrating from beyond Muttra they once held & chaubisi,
or group of 24 villages, with Namaunda as their head-quarters.
CAOKHIA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
CAONIYA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CHOŅPŘA, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
CHOPRA, a Khatéi section.
CHOBAR, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CHOTA, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
CA OTIA, one of the clans of the Pachádas (9.v.). They claim to be Chauhan
Kájputs by descent from their eponym, Chotiá. Most of them are
Muhammadans and only a few Hindus.
CHOWAH, Chowan, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
CAUCHKÁNA, a clan of the Sials.
Chunál, an agricultural clan found in Shahpar.
CAÚHAN, (? Chauhán) a sept of Baurias, claiming Chaubán descent, found
in Ferozepur. They avoid the use of oil in lamps, and use ghi instead.
After the wedding a girl seldom revisits her parents' home, and if
in consequence of a quarrel with her husband's people she does do
So, and dies in her paternal home, her parents are bound to find
another bride for her husbaod in her stead. Fornication in this sept
is punished with excommunication and re-admission to the caste only
permitted on payment of a fine, but even that does not remove the stigma.
CHOHŘÁ.--The sweeper or scavenger, and hence the out-caste, par excellence,
of the Punjab, whose name is popularly supposed to be a corruption
of Sudra.* It has many synonyms, but few of them are precisely
the exact equivalent of Chuhrá. Thus a Chamár is, probably by
origin, a Chuhrá who works in leather, but the Cbamárs appear to
form almost a distinct caste, though both the castes are placed in the
same rank and lumped together in the popular phrase Chubrá-Chamár,
just as Mochi-Julábá is used to denote collectively the two castes
which bear those names. As a scavenger or rather as a 'sweeper up
of dust' the Chubțá is termed khák-rob. As a domestic he is
ironicallyt styled Mihtar or chieftain': as & worker in leather
he is called a Dhed (lit. 'crow'), as a weaver he is styled Megh,
at least in Sialkot, in which district the Meghs however form to all
intents and purposes a separate caste: and as an executioner he is
koowo as Jallád. Further as a taoner the Chuhrá is called a
Khatik in the Eastern Punjab, and as a breeder of swine he is known
as a Hali. These two groups appear to form distinct castes, or at
least sub-castes which rank below the Chuhrá proper, The Khatí ks
have a sub-group called Basúr.
Change of religion also involves the adoption of a new title and
the Chabrá on conversion to Sikhism becomes & Mazbi or Mazhabi,
* Once Bálmík, founder of the caste, arrived late at a feast given by a Bhagat and
found only fragments of it left. These he devoured and earned the name of Chubța or
tone who eats leavings.'
Bat in Gurgaon mihtar is used as equivalent to chaudhri and the term may be origin.
ally free from any taint of iropy.



The Chuhra groups.
183
while one who embraces Islám becomes a Musalli,* or in the south-west
of the Punjab a Kurtana, t or be may ever aspire to be entitled Díndár:
indeed in the villages of the Pachháda Rájpúts of Sirsa the people who
remove filth are called Díndár-Khákrob and they follow Mubam madan
observances, being even admitted to smoke with other Muhammadans,
Bhangi is also used, but not very correctly, as a synonym for chuhrás.
The Chuhrás' relations to other castes vary considerably. They are
distinctly superior to the Sánsis, from whom alone they will not eat
in Nábha. But in Gurgaon they are also said to look down upon the
Changars or Dhias, who are makers of winnowing sieves, and they
are said to refuse food from the Dhának's hands too, though their
claim to superiority is a doubtful one. The Chuhrás are split up into
various groups:
Territorial.
Deswáli—of the Gangetic plain. Sotarwála- of the riverain lands.
Bágri-of the Great Indian Desert. Jangalke-of the Jangal tract.
Various other divisions exist, being recognised by the Chuhțás them-
selves if not by others. Such are :
1. Bálmíkí.
I 2. Lál-Begi.
These two are really identical, Lál Beg having been Bálmík's disciple.
Both terms are thus equivalent to disciples of Bálmík or Lál Beg.'
The gots of the Chuhrás are numerous and some are wide-spread.
Various origins are claimed for them. Thus the Bohat, found in
Gurgaon, claim to be Punwar Rajputs, and the Sárwán, also of Gurgaon,
to be Chauhans. There is also a Chauhan got, south of the Sutlej.
In Rohtak the Lohat also claim to be descendants of one Sánjhar
Dás, a Rájput, while the Baohár say they are Punwár Rájputs from
Dháránagri in the Deccan and that their ancestors immigrated into
that District with the Káyaths. These two gots do not intermarry with
Changars, and lay stress on the necessity for marrying a girl before
she is 15 or 16. They regard Balmík as God's brother and revere him
as their prophet with a Muhammadan ritual, reciting prayers (namáz)
in a line headed by an imám, and prostrating themselves with the
words :-Bálmík káfi, Bálmík shafi, Bálmík mu'áfi, bolo momno wohi ek.
The Pail-powár got, in Rohtak, also claims Rájput origin, saying
that a Rájput woman who was pregnant threw in her lot with the
Chuhrás. Her son was called a Pail-powár on account of her descent.
This got reveres Gurú Nának, does not employ Brahmans, and gets its
weddings solemnized by one of its own members. But it buries its dead.
The original division, Dr. Youngson was informed, was into Lúté,
Jháe, and Tóngré, the Lúté being Manhás Rájput, wandering Dográs;
the Jháe, Dháe or Sáhí being named from their founder, who, when
a child, slept beside a hedgehog (seh); and the Țéngré being makers
of wionowing-sieres, living in the desert, and named Țéngré on account
of their pride. Besides the three original divisions, there are Goriyé,
so called from the fact that their founder was born in a tomb (gor).
* Musalli may be defined as a Chuhța converted to Islám who bas abandoned harúm
food, eating only halál. The Musallís do not iutermarry with the Clubļas, or at least
only take daughters from them.
† Kurtána or Kotana is said to be derived from Hindi kora, 'whip, and tanna 'to
stretoh,' and thus to mean 'Aogger,' because sweepers were employed as executioners by
Muhammadan rulers,



184
Chuhrá genealogy.
They hail from Delbi. The founder was Shah Jahán's son. He was
also called Kaņạárá, because he spoke harshly.*
N t come : Pathán, originally from Kábul, in Akbar's time. There
we three brothers, of whom Dhagána was the eldest. They entered
the untry as faqirs, or pirs. Gil; from Chakrárí in Gujranwala. A
tree sheltered the first of the name in a time of rain: and in Dera
Gbázi Khán the section respects bricks. Bbațţi; from the Bár in
Gujrápwálá, Pindi Bhattián, Dullá being their chief. Sakotré; in
Akbar's time Sahotrá was thrown to the tigers, but the tigers did not
injure him. In Dera Gházi Khán 'the Sahotrá section respects the
lion. Soéní Bhunniár; descendants of Rájá Karn, the Brahman, who
gave away 11 maunds of gold every dav before he ate bis food.
Then follow Laddar; KHOKAR, who are said to avoid eating the heart
of a dead animal in Montgomery, while in Dera Gbází Khán they do not
eat Charta or things roasted on the fire ; Khonjé, Kalíáné, Ratti, Mathi,
Búrt, Momé (in ilága Momá near Gondhal). The Momí are said to be
descended from Balmík. Hauns, Chapríbán (in Khák beyond Lahore,
makers of wicker.work), Ghussúr, Balhím, Labanté, Nahír.
The Dúm, the Chuhrá, the Mírásí, the Máchchí, the Jhíwar, and the
Changar, are all of the same.crigin. They claim to be indigenous in the
Sialkot District, at least as far as the older divisions are concerned.
In the time of the Pándavas and Kauravas there were four sons of
Kanwar Brahmá, viz., Púrabá, Párthá, Sidů hrá, and Práshta, the last
being also called Jhaumprá, from living in a jungle. There are other
names applied to him and to his successors, such as Ghungur Bég, Ail
Malúk, Lál Bég, Pír Chhoțá, Bálmik, Bálá. The following genealogical
tree was given, but I presume it is a very uncertain one: -
A. GENEALOGY.
Práshtá.
Kálak Dås, and his wife Sílawanti.
Alif.
Eighteen generations, all jángli.
Bálá Rikhí and his house.
Barnrík,
Bảl.
* Another version (from Montgomery) is that Jhata, Jhába, Tíngrá and Athwal were
four brothers, probably Muhammadans. Of these J bata became a follower of Bábá Farid,
and his descendants, called Jhatas, continued to observe the Muhammadap law (i.e., did
not become Chuhļas). Jhába's and Tingrá's descendants worked as Ohuhfas, and are
kuown as Jhais (Chais) and Tingrás, respectively. Of Athwál's progeuy some remained
Muhammadans, while others became Chuhras and are now known as Athwál Chabras.
The Jhába (Jhai or Chai) section is closely associated with Multán. When tbat city
was foonded, traditiou asserts that the king commenced to build a fort which collapsed
as fast as it was built. The spot was held by the Jhába Bhangís, one of whom offerod
bimself as the fort's foundation-stone, and is said to be still standing in the Kháni Burj
of the Fort. Some people regard this burj as a place of pilgrimage. The Jhai-possibly
owing merely to his fortunate name-was sacrificed to ensure victory in battle-Jhaye
sandhi fateh wandi, wbioh is explained to mean, if a living Chuha be bailt into a thick
wall of burnt brick before going to war, viotory is assured.
In Tarn Taran tahsil, Amritsar District, Brahma's son, Chuhra; had three sons, Lata,
Jhába, and a pichhlag named Tingry, from whom are desounded the fi original bootions of
the caste,



186
ANOTTIR GENBALOGY OR KURBÍNÁNA.
Att.
Patt.
Adis and wife Véshuis.
Sadds saddljivá and wife Govittri.
Ghang and wife Surangiya.
Dhand and wife Silk Sakat.
Nil Kanth and wife G6 Atmá Déví
Kanwar Brahmi and wife Burhadji or Jastri.
Bidhru. Púrabá. Bhárthá. Práabta, alao called Jhaumprá, 1st Incarnation, and wife Manus Dorf.
Ad Gópál and wife Bhilní,
Sankéswar and wife Sadawanti, 2nd Incarnation.
Onésh' Deota. Mngat Gosáin and wife Dhanwants.
Gaur Rikh and wife Naarangék,
Dayal Rikh and wife Manglán.
Jal Bhigan and wife Pavittaran,
Angash Dooth and wife Satwanti,
Agganmar and wife Asná.
Sankh Pat or Santokh and wife Jáss Vartí, 3rd Incarnation.
Bélá Rikhí and wife 8hám Ráp, 4th Incarnation.
Bír Bamrik and wife Rájwanti, 6th Incarnation.
Ball and wife Nau Chandrán.
Iswar Bálá and wife Mansá, 6th Incarnation,
Balmik and wife Mabén, 7th Incarnation ,
Ud Rikh. Budh Bikh and wife Salikso.
Márwar Didári and wife Dayáli.
Núr Didári and wife Ask wanti.
Bhám Saranda and wife Surgán, 8th Incarnation,
Sham Barbari and wife Lachhmi,
Sri Rang 8hám and wife Rájwanti.
Bati and wife Sálo.
sháb Safé and wite saván.
Arján and wife Arfán.



186
A Chuhrá genealogy.
Pír Bával and wife Jáfarán.
Ásá and wifo Janatán. Qásá.
Ahir Malúk and wife Bikiáwatí.
Ghungar Bég and wife Nåsarán,
Báz Bég and wife Sadiqán.
Barébbi Beg and wife Varsán,
Lál Bég and wife fatilán, 9th Incarnation.
Bálá Sher (also called Pír Jhóțá, the wrestler) and wife Amblikán, 10th Incarnation.
Badá Bálá Lál Khan and wife Roshanán.
Pi: Dhagáná and wife Núr Dívání.
Shák Súrá and wife Gussán,
MÁhi Shah. Dangshí shíh. Shah Athles and wife Laohhmi.
Ghasítá Shah.
Yará sháh. Sévá Shah and wife Sarsí.
Barám Shah.
Karam Sbáb.
Fazl Sháh.
Jám Sbáb.
Arpar Sháb.
Arif Shah.
Langar Sháb.
Zabardast Sháb. Chugattá Murad
Mobammed
Sháh. Shah.
Shába.
*Karim *Qutab
Qásim Sháb. Bháb. Sháb. Raha Shab. Umar Shah.
Shán.
Kerim
Qatab
Falel Sháh.
*Sardár Sháh. *Sultán Sháb.
Jawabir Sháb. Bára Sháh.
Alim Shah. *Jamiat Shah.
Fath sháls. *Bahadur Sháb. *Nádir Sháb.
*Alif Sháb. *Gauhar Sháb.
Bálá is a name given to the leaders.
*Lákim Sháb. *Fath Sháb. *Bahawal Shah.
A THIRD GINBALOGY FROM (MÁLER KOTLA) 18-
Akál Parakh (i.e., God).
Mahádeo Sri Maháráj.
Bikhí Deo.
Rikhí Deo.
Ansadá.
Sabad Rikh
Sandokh Rikh.
Bálmik or Bálnik.
* Present representatives,



187
A ROURTR GTXALOEY.
Bálá Shah Santokh Rikh dá,
Bálá Shah is son of Santokh Rikh,
Santokh Rikh Bharap Dit Rikh dá,
Santókh Rikh is son of Sharáp Dit Rikh,
Shoráp Dit Rikh Ainák dá,
Sharáp Dit Rikh is sou of Ainák,
dinák Rikhí dá,
Ainák is son of Rikhí,
Rikhí Bikhí dá,
Rikhí is son of Bikhí,
Bikhi Mahádév dá,
Bikhí is son of Mahádér,
Mahaddv Bhagwan Aut Khandé dá.
Mahádév or Shiv is son of Aut Kbanda,
Aut Khandá Alakh Purkh dá,
Aut Khanda is son of Holy Person,
Alakh Purkh Sakt dá,
Holy Person is son of Almighty Power,
Sakt Agam dá
Almighty Power is son of the Unknowablo.
Another version is that Bhárthá, Sadhará, Parátná and Purba were
four Brahman brothers, and when their cow died they made Purba, the
youngest, drag away the carcase, first promising to help him in his task,
but eventually out-casting him for doing it. In Dera Ghazi Khán
Urga, Bhárga, Sidhra and Frástá, also called Chhaumpra, are given as
the four brothers, and the following verses are current:-
(i) Alláh chitthi ghalli hai, sab khol bián, God sent a letter, setting forth all things :
Ithé giá manké hun, kiún karin ablimán: 'Hereunto you submitted, why do you repino
Gokhri té aike sabi kardi aryán.
The cow was cast out by one of you, why then
do you plead,
Asán Brahman-janam de gal jamd tanyán. That “we are Brahmans by birth," yo who
wear the jámát tied with strings.'
The last couplet is also given thus:-
Gókhri utè daké kardé aryán,
They are all arguing over the cow:
Asán Brahman janam dé gal jámé tanyán. (Saying) “We are Brahmans by birth, though
wo wear the jámá fastened with tags."
Further these two verses are sometimes added :-
Ote charkhane dôréli laryán,
Wearing too the chicken cloth,
Rabbá ! 8áde bha di gallán mushkil banión. O Lord! We are in great distress.'
(ii) Alaf Alláh nún yád kar bandián we dhuna 'Remember God, O Man! Praise be to him,
surjanhár,
the Creator and Protector of mankind !
Chugde chardi gokhri ho pát murdárd, The cow fell dead while grazing
Hue deote akathe jáke karin pukárá,
The gods assembled and exclaimed:-
Tusin Brahman zát de ki bangat bhárd, “Ye are Brahmans by caste, yet in what
distress are ye fallen!
Tusáde pichhón kaun hai jisdá maqsad Who is there among yo, of high purpose ?"
bhára,
sáde pichhún Chhaumprá jisdá maqsad" Chaumprá is of us and his purpose is high."
bhára,
Hukm hógiá Chhaumpre jásato murdára,' Chaumpſá was bidden to cast away the
carcase.
Usne dhanak charhát, gokhri já pái pichh. He drow his bow and the cow was thrown far
wárá.
away.
Ayá gokhri satke kahe : 'dió bachan hamárá.' After throwing it away he came back and
said :-"Now fulfil your promise."
Chaukión sádión dúr hó terá nich utárá. (But they said : ) “Begone from our hearths,
thou art now an out.caste.".
The following stanza is also current in Dera Gházi Khán :-
(iii) Tún, Sahib, ghar Bahmanán merá janam Thou, God, hast given me birth in a Brahman's
deól.
house.
Kháke sánpal piá, ekó thálí rasói.
I was brought up with others, eating together
with them in the same dish.
Chaumpſá age Rab de kare rajói :-
Chaumppá prays before God :-
Khabrán ghallin tordián, ho múnh dharoi. Thou hast sent me tidings from afar-DOW
come before me.
Merá janam dió nich ghar men, sun band. Thou hast given me birth in a low house, bear
πανάκά.
me, my Lord.
* Cf. the genoalogy givon at p. 530 of The Legends of the Punjab, Vol. III.
| The jamá is the long over.garment, fastened with tags instead of buttoos



188
Chuhrá origins.
rrent tradition is necessaryk as its progenitor groups. Most of the
Nále ummat bakhsh, nále bakhoh jandad Grant me followers and grant me funeral
prayers-(or
Forgive my followers and also forgive us for
not having funeral prayers).
Hindú nezè áwan na dewen Musalman na The Hindus do uot allow us to come near
paſhon janázo.
them, and Muhammadans will not read our
funerai prayers...
Meri kaun siffat bharegá, sun gharib-nawásá. Who will bear me up-hearken! O Lord !
Alláh ákhe Chaumpşiá tún ho syáná. God says : 'Chaumprá! be wise!
Do mazhab do ním dá main darykó vagáná. I will make two rivers to flow of the things'
which are forbidden by the two religions
(i.e., one of the carcases of cows and the
other of the carcases of pigs).
Púr jannat banáké sahmnd vikhánd. I will make heaven across them and show it to
you.
Rám te Rahim ne chhip chhip bahná ?) Rám (Hindus) and Rahim (Muhammadans)
will conceal themselves.
Sawá neze din lákar há'ú dózakh dháná. A great fire will be burnt in bell at about 10 A.M.
(i.e., when the sun is lt bamboo high).
Alláh ákhe Chaumpriá ummat teri nún vich God says : 'Chaumprá, now will I send thy
jannat pahunchaná.
followers to Heaven.'
Alláh chitthi likhi he, hath Chaumpre pharái. God has written a letter and given it in the
hands of Chaumprá :-
Th 3d sand 6 tai da đi.
'Thou hast to carry out this carcase-it is your
fate.'
ORIGINS.
Various legends have been invented to explain the origins of the
Chuhſa caste as a whole and of its different groups. Most of these
carry its history back to Bálmík as its progenitor, or, at least, its patron
saint. Hence it is necessary to recount, in the first instance, what
current tradition has to say of Bálmík.
One legend avers that Balmík used to sweep Bhagwán's courtyard,
and tbat the god gave him a robe, which he did not put on but buried
in & pit. When asked by Bhagwán why he did not wear it, Bálmík
went in search of it and found in it a boy whom he took to Bhagwán.
The god directed him to rear the boy, who was named Lál Beg.
Bálmík is said to mean, born of the balni,' or serpent's hole.
Bálmík was a Bhil, a race of mountaineers, who used to rob and kill
travellers passing through the forest. One day seven Rishis journeyed
by, and when Bắlmík attacked them, they asked him why he did so, as
they had nothing worth stealing. He replied that he had vowed to kill
all whom he found in the forest. The Rishis then enquired if he had
friends to assist him if captured. Whereupon he asked his parents
and wife if they would help him in case of need, but they declared they
would not. Bálmík tben told the Rishis he was friendloss, and they
urged him to give up his evil ways, and to repeat mara, mará,'
continuously. But rapidly recited mará, mará' sounds like 'Rám, i
Rám,' and as he thus repeated God's name, his sins were forgiven him,
By the evd of 12 years his body was covered with dust and overgrown
with grass, the flesh being decomposed. Once more the seven Rishis
passed by and heard a faint voice repeating 'Rám, Rám,' under a cover,
ing of olay. This they removed, and, having re-clothed his bones with
lesb, called him Bálmík, as one who had come out of a serpent's hole.
1. TABOS AND TOTEMS.
The Gil will not eat bataún, the egg-plant (bhatá bart) : the Lúté do
not eat hare or rabbit : the Kanaré (7) abstain from cloves: the Sabótra
refuse to look on a tiger ; at marriages, however, they make the image
posed by and he ties mans his bo.God's namara, mam repeat closest do they
him Bálmil removed, andesting Rám mom the s



Ion Mihe Stakadéwarding the Bala Sush, God's da
Chuhrá panchayats.
189
of a tiger which the women worship: the Bhatti will not sit on a bench
of boards or bricks: no Chuhrá will eat seh, or hedgehog.
The Sárwán Chuhras do not dye cloth with kasumba, saffron, and
will only one thatch for their roofs. In the Bawal nizámat of Nábha
they also wear no gold ornaments, thinking this tabu to be imposed
on them by their satí. In Dera Gházi Khan the different sections
reverence different animals, i.e., the Sahótá respect the lion, the
Åthwál or Uthwál the camel, and one section the porcupine, while bricks
are said to be revered by the Gil, men bowing and women veiling their
faces before them. Thus the Sindhu muhin or got respects indigo: the
Kandiára respects the horned rat; while the Khokhar got is said to avoid
eating bharta, i.e., anything roasted on a fire.* The Khokhar got is
also said to abstain from the flesh of dead animals as well as from
eating the heart, which all other Chuhțás will eat.
The flesh of the hare is also avoided by Chu hras generally-a tabu
explained by the following legend :-Once a Chubra by chance killed
a calf, and hid it under a basket, but its owner tracked it to the
Chuhra's house. The Chuhța declared that the basket contained a
hare, and when it was opened it was found that the calf had turned
into & hare-80 from that time all the Chuhſas have given up eating
hard. Some, however, do not abide by this rule. In Kángra it is said
that once a hare sought Bálmík’s protection, and thus the tabu arose.
In Montgomery the avoidance of hare's flesh is ascribed to the influence
of the Makhdúm Jahániau of Sher Shah, those who are not his
followers disregarding the prohibition. In Dera Gházi Khán the
current legend is that once Bálá Shah, the ancestor of the Chuhļas,
and Mulláh Núr, the Mírásí, were in God's dargáh, or court. The
latter asked Bálá Sbáh not to sweep, whereupon a quarrel arose and
Bálá Shah struck the bard with his broom, knocking out his right eye.
Mulláb Núr appealed to God and produced a hare as his witness---so
now the sweepers do not eat hare's flesh, In Gurgáon, however, the
prohibition is said to be contined to the Sus Gohar got, or, according to
another account, to the Balgher got. In Maler Kotla it is confined to the
Sahota got. About Leiah, women are said to eat the hare, but not men.
2. GOVERNING BODY.
Their representative assembly, or governing body, is the Painch,
Panch, Panchayat, the members of which are chosen by the people,
and the head of which, i.e., the Pír Panch or Sar Panch, is selected
by the other members. I have heard them speak of a kharpanch too,
i.e., the most troublesome ariember of the panch! The office of the
pír panch is held permanently, and is even in some cases hereditary.
If the pir is unable to preside at the meetings bis place may be takən
by a sarbaruh, or substitute, for the time being. The painch settles
disputes of all sorts, having to interfere especially in matters of mar-
riage and divorce; it also looks after the poor. It punishes offenders
by excowmunication, hukka páni band, and also by imposing fines
of 20, 40, 100 rupees, or even more. The punishment of excommuni-
cation, of being barádarí sé judáy is a heavy one, pointing to the fast
that the people, valuing so highly the opinion of their fellow-men,
This seems impossible. Bharthá is possibly intended. It is a preparation of the
brinjal (batáún) made by roasting it in bot asbes: Maya Singh's Panjabi Dictionary: 8. v.



190
Chuhrá marriage rules.
are amenable to the rules of their society by reason of sanctions
affecting their standing in the society. All over the Punjab the
dearest thing to a Panjábí is his 'izzat, i.e., the estimation in which
he is held by his fellows. In the south-east of the Province the
Chuhſas have chabútras or places of assembly at several towns, such
as Hánsi, Hissár, Barwála, Sirsa and Bhiwáni. Each chabútra is under
a chaudhri, who in Gurgaon is styled mihtar. The chaudhrís preside
over panchayats at which all kinds of disputes are decided, and also act
at weddings as mukhias or spokesmen. In Nábha the chaudhrís are
indeed said to exercise supreme authority in caste disputes.
3. RULES OF INTERMARRIAGE.
They do not marry within their own section, but they take wives
from all the other divisions. Marriage with a wife's sister is permitted
after the death of the wife. Marriage with the wife's mother, or wife's
aunt, is not allowed. Two wives are allowed; the former of whom is
considered the head, and has peculiar rights and privileges. The
wives live together in the same house. Marriage takes place when
the girl is about 7 or 8, and even 5 years of age.
Marriages are arravged by the nái (barber), the chhimbá (washerman),
and the miriisi (village bard and genealogist). The consent of the
parents is necessary in all cases, except when the woman is a widow,
or independent of her parents. Girls are never asked whom they will
marry, or if they are willing to marry. They would not give an ex-
pression of their wishes, as they say, sharm ké máré, for shame. There
is no freedom of choice in the case of young persons marrying.
A price is paid by the bridegroom's family, the amount of it being
settled by the two contracting parties. It becomes the bridegroom's
property after marriage. An engagement to marry may be broken
off in the case of a defect or blemish in either the man or the woman,
and divorce inay be obtained after marriage by a regular “ writing of
divorcewent.” Divorced wives marry again. Children of different
mothers inherit on equal terms, and all assume the father's section.
Widows remarry, but they have no price. The widow of an elder
brother may marry a younger brother, and the widow of a younger
brother may marry an elder brother. A widow marrying out of her
husband's family takes her children with her.
4. Food.
It is difficult to say precisely what animals the Chuhệas really avoid,
and probably the prohibitions against eating any particular animal are
loose, varying from place to place and under the pressure of circum-
stances. Chuhțas in Gujrát will eat dead animals, i.e., those which
have died a natural death :* also the sahna (lizard) and wild cat, but
not the jackal, fox, goh (lizard), or tortoise: get one group lives chiefly
on the tortoise and is called kuchemánda. Hence the Chuhras are
superior to the Sánsís who eat jackals, etc., and interior to the Musallis
who have given up eating the flesh of animals which have died a natural
death. In Sialkot the Chuhşás are said to avoid pork and only to eat
flesh allowable to Muhammadans, but they may eat haram flesh as well
as halál.
* Thus in Montgomery it is said all Chubrås, except the Khokhars, will oat tho Bosh of
dead animals



Chuhrá observances.
191
II.DOMESTIC CEREMONIES.
BIRTH AND PREGNANCY.
In accouchement the woman sits, with one woman on each side of her,
and one behind her. The dár, or midwife, sits in front. No seat is
used. When the child is born the midwife places her head on the
stomach of the mother to press out the blood, and with her feet and
hands presses (dabáti) the whole body. The dáí and women relations
attend during and after confinement.
As an expression of joy at the birth of a child a string of shírín, or
acacia leaves, is hung across the door. Green symbolises joy and bless-
ing, mubárikbádi. The leaves of the akk, a plant with poisonous milky
juice, are thrown on the house to keep away evil spirits. If the child
is a boy, born after two girls, they put the boy in a cloth, which they
tie at both ends as a sort of cradle, and then they lift the child through
the roof, while the nurse says :-Trikhal ki dhár á-gai, i.e., 'the third
time thrives.' Gur is given to the friends, and ten days after that a
dinner, to which the relatives are invited. At the end of 21 days the
mother is over her separation, and resumes cooking.
ADOPTION.
Adoption of children is common, but with no special ceremonies.
INITIATION.
A rcan of any other caste can be admitted into the Chuhra caste after
the following initiatory rite has been performed :-The would-be convert
asks the Chuhſa headman of the place to fix a day, on which all the
Chuhras assemble at the thiin of Bálmík. At the time and date appointed
the dhádhís of Bálmík go there, prostrate themselves and sing praises
to God and Bálmík, with accompaniments on the rabána and dotára.
The khidmatgár, or attendant at the shrine, lights a jot, or large lamp
filled with ghi and gogal at the candidate's cost, as well five ordinary
lamps filled with ghi. He also prepares chúrmá of wheat or other
grains according to the candidate's means, with ghi and gur in the
name of God and Bálmík; boiling, too, 14 sers of rice in an iron pan
in the name of Bálmík's orderly. When all these things are placed
in front of the than in Dera Gházi, the Chuhịas assembled Say :-
Shahe! Bál dán karim karahán, le đím than de age.
Jo koi mane tainú nál sidaq de usnú har shákhá phal lage.
Awen dekh nahin bhulná oh roze bage,
Teri matti dá buki mania dhar dargáh de age.
Baki ute main deván brátán jiwen banayan dine te rátán.
Bolo momno ek sach paun dhani.'
“Make halwa, 0 Sihábas (Chubrás) in Báli's honour, and bring it
before his shrine,
Whosoever adores thee in sincerity, prospers in every way..
Be not misled by whited domes,
A handful of his (or thy) earth is acceptable to the Almighty.
I will bring thee offerings on a camel's back as often as day
follows night,
Declare, ye believers in God, that the One True God is Master of
the Winds."



192
Chuhrá betrothals.
The caodidate is then admitted into the caste. He is made to eat
& little chúrma and rice out of the k aráhi, drink somo water and
smoke. The rest of the chúrmá is distributed among the other Chuhras
and he is declared a member of the caste.
In Rohtak Bálmíki sweepers admit a man of any caste into the
Chabrá ranks, except a Dhának, a Sánsi or a Dhia. The recruit is
merely required to prepare 14 sers of malida and, after placing it under
Bálmík's banner, worship the saint. The followers of Nának admit
converts of every caste into their ranks.
In Gurgaon the rite of initiation is a revolting one and is thus des
scribed :-
Over a rectangular pit is put a chárpái, and beneath it the candidate
is seated in the pit, while the Chuhrás sit on the clárpái. Each bathes
in turn, clearing his nose and spitting,* so that all the water, etc., falls
on to the man in the pit. He is then allowed to come out and seated
on the chårpái. After this all the Chuhrás wash his body and eat with
him, and then ask him to adopt their profession.
An initiate appears to be called Bhangi, or in Gurgaon Sarbhangi.
The latter, it is said, may smoke and eat with the Chuhrás, but are not
admitted to intermarriage with them.
21.
BETROTHAL.
When a betrothal takes place, the lági, the marriage functionary and
go-between, goes to the house of the boy's parents, taking with him
sugar and dates for the inmates. He states the porpose of his visit,
and there is placed before him five or ten, or more, rupees, of which
he takes one and goes. If the people are very poor they intimate to
the lágí how much he should take out of the heap. Returning to the
house of the girl's parents he makes his report, describing the hoy, his
prospects, circumstances, and so on.
A lágí now goes from the boy's residence, carrying clothes and
jewels for the girl. He himself is presentad with a turban (pagrí) and
songs are sung by the womankind. The binding portion of the cero.
monies is where the turban is given to the lágí before witnesses.
In two, three, four, or five years, the girl's parents send the lågi to
say that it is time for the marriage. If the parents of the boy find it
convenient, they declare that they are ready, and instruct the lági to
ask the other house to send a nishan, bahochá, bahorá, which is a present
of three garments, one to the mirási, ona to the nái, and the third to
the chuhrá who lights the fire. There is gur also in the basket contain.
ing the clothes, and this is distributed to the singing girls and others.
The lágí receives a rupee or two, and goes back with the news that the
Bahóchă has been accepted. Then a tréwar, a present of seven garinents,
is prepared, and sent from the girl's residence, a white phulkáré (embroi-
Ohuhțas think that the dirt of their own bodios purifies others and they 80 remote
At with their own hands. If a man follows their occupation but does not undergo the
ordeal described above they do not treat him as a Chuhfá or effect any rolationship
with him,



ende til has been instructed before and with her seven opná
ore the wedd a heat roun the boy's is, seated on
Chuhrá weddings.
193
dered shawl), a chób or chóp (a red cotton shawl with a silk embroidered
edge), a chóli (bodice), a kurtá (jacket), a dariái (narrow silk cloth), a
lungi or súya (a cheok cloth or petticoat), „wo pagrís (turbans) and one
chádar (sheet or shawl). The jacket bas a gold button, bírá, and three
silver ones called allian, and gótá, or gold and silver lace, with the figure
of a man embroidered on the right breast or shoulder. This present
is sent to the boy's residence, where the garments are spread out on a
bed to give the inmates and friends an opportunity of seeing them.
The légi takes with him also guļ, patássé (sweets), and a rupee as ropna,
which he gives to the bridegroom. This ropná may be seven dried
dates, and other things. The boy's hands are dyed with maindi (henna)
to signify jog. Again rupees are placed before the lági, of which he
takes as many as he has been instructed to take. He then says that
such and such & day bas been fixed for the wedding and goes back to tell
the bride's friends that the day is appointed. On this occasion songs
are sung by the boy's sister and mother.
Eight or nine days before the wedding they bave what they call wái
páná, that is, they take ghungnián (wheat roasted in the husk) to the
quantity of five or six paróni, which they put in the boy's lap. This he
distributes with yur to his friends, of the same age as he is, seated on a
basket. Wheat is distributed to the other friends, perhaps as much
as four or five maunds, with gur. The boy is anointed with oil as
many times as there are days before the marriage, and a song is sung
by his friends.
The náí anoints the bridegroom to make him sweet. The ointment
is made of the flour of wheat and barley, kachúr (a drug), ķhardal
(w bite mustard), chaihal charílá (a scent), and oil. This preparation
is called batná.
When the boy is taken off the basket they bind & gáná (ornament)
or kangná (bracelet) on his wrist, which consists of an irod ring, a
cowrie, and a manka (string) of kach (glass) beads. They, put a knife
into his hand at the same time. All this is to keep off the evil spirits.
The same operation is performed on the girl by her friends; only sbe
puts on a kangní (wrist ornament) or chúri (bracelet of iron), instead
of taking a knife in her hand.
Betrotbal takes place at any time from five years of age and upward,
the consent of the parents only being necessary. if the betrothai
is cancelled, the painch arranges the amount to be repaid, and
recovers it.
When the wedding day approaches, a big dinner is given in the
boy's home on a Wednesday, the entertainment extending to Thursday
morning. This is called mél.
The bharjái, or some other relative, with his wife, goes to the well
for a jar of water, which they carry between thema, With this water
the nåí washes the bridegroom on a basket, His hair is washed
with buttermilk and oil. Seven chapnian (upburnt earthen plates)
are placed before him. These he breaks with his teet. His uncle on
the mother's side giver him a cow, eto., and the bride's uncle gives
the same to her. The bridegroom puts va his new clothes, the old



194
Chuhrá weddings.
ones being appropriated by the náí. After his uncles have sung, his
sister sings and gives him his clothes.
He is then dressed on a rug after his bath ; the cáfá or turban is
placed on his head, over which the sehrá, or garland of flowers, is
thrown and saffron is sprinkled on his clothes.
A tray is put down with a rupee in it, representing 101 rupees.
On the rupee gur is spread, while they say, Jagat parván supri só
dharm, Ikótr sau rupaiá ghar da; “ According to the custom wbich
binds us like religion, We lay before you 101 rupees of our own
house."
Then into the tray is put the tamból or néundrá, i.e., the contribution
given by wedding guests to defray the expenses of the festival. At
each succeerling marriage one rupee more is given, or the same sum
is given each time, if it is so arranged. Néundrá is given in the girl's
home as well. This custom of giving at pach other's wedding is a
very binding one. Whoever receives néundrá from his guests must
pay back in néundrá one and half or double the amount at their
wedding feasts. .
The party now gets ready to go to the bride's home. The bridegroom
is seated on a mare, or, if poor, he goes on foot. He is accompanied
by the sarbáhlá, or bridegroom's friend, generally seated behind him
on the same animal. Op their way they give a rupee to the headmen
of the villages they pass. This is for the poor. Fireworks blaze as
they proceed, while the drums and other noisy instruments of music
announce the coming of the bridegroom, who sits under a paper
umbrella, or canopy, which has been made by the fireworks-man.
This last-named individual gets money also on the way-a rupee or
80. As they approach the bride's village the women and girls of the
village come out, singing, to surround the whole party with a cotton
thread, as if they had made prisoners of them all.
Meantime the bride has been dressed, and songs have been sung by
her friends.
Having arrived at the village they rest in a garden, or go to the
dárá, or traveller's rest-house, while dinner is being prepared. A
large tray is brought out (changér lál) with sugar in it. The lágis put
some into the bridegroom's mouth, the rest being divided among the
guests. The sarbáhlá, or bridegroom's friend, and the others prepare
to go to the bride's house with the beating of drums. The two parties
meet and salute one another. The bride's father gives a cow or a
buffalo, but if he is poor he gives a rupee, which the mirási, or village
bard, gets. Nearing the house they find the way obstructed by a stick
(kuddan) placed across the path by the mehtars, or ág bálnéwálé; (fire-
lighters). They must be paid a rupee before the party can proceed.
They reach another gate formed by a red cloth held by women. This
is chunni. The bride's sister receives a rupee at this stage. The
machhi, or jhiwar (water-carrier), brings a vessel of water, and says,
“ Méré kumb dá lág deo, Give the price of my earthen water jar.”
He also receives a rupee.
The marriage party now dine, while the women of the marriage
party sing.



Chuhrá weddings.
195
While the party dines outside, the láſá (bridegroom) and the sarbáhlá
(friend) go inside the house. A chhánani (a sort of sieve for cleaning
flour or wheat) is placed over the door with a light burning in it.
The bridegroom strikes this with a sword or knife seven times, knocking
it down, light and all, with the seventh stroke. The sarbúhlí, or bride's
friend, comes with a handful of oil and gur which she holds firmly,
while the other girls tell the bridegroom to open the hand with his
little finger. This he tries to do, but the sarbáhlá ad vises him to use
his thumb and press more forcibly. When her hand is opened, she
rubs the bridegroom's face with the mixture. The young lady also
spits rice in his face-phurkrá. The bridegroom is then drawn into
an inner room by means of a pair of trousers (páéjána) twisted round
his neck. He has to give the girls a rupee before they let him go.
They place a small tent made of reeds (ghoróbérí) like a tripod, on a
pírí (stool), and in it kujian (small lamps and vessels) made of dough.
One of these is lit, and the bridegroom is asked to put cloves into the
little kujian.
They then take a tray and put it on a cup (katórá). This they
call tilkan. All the girls press down the tray on the cup with their
hands one above another, telling the bridegroom to lift it up. He
tries to do su but cannot, and the sarbáhlá with his foot overturns it.
This is the signal for the girls to give gálí (abuse) to the sarbáhlá : they
pull his hair, slap him, push him about, and generally ill-treat him until
the bridegroom at his cries for help asks them to desist.
They deny having beaten him, and treat them both to sweets (laddú
and parákrián) and sugar which they call béjwárí or hájiri. The bride
is now admitted and seated. They throw bits of cotton wool on her,
which he picks off. He takes off her troubles, as it were. They throw
them on him also. During these observances the girls sing at intervals.
The bridegroom now walks seven times round the bride, and the
bride seven times round him. He lays his head on hers, and she hers
on him, after which she kicks him on the back. The others follow
suit. It goes hard with the unhappy bridegroom then. They seize
his chádar (shawl), and tie two pice in it. The bride then fastens it
tightly round his neck, meaning by this that he is captured and is
hallan jógií nahin (unable to move). He recites the following
couplet :-
Main khatángá, tún kháin. I will earn money, and food you.
Meri galón patká láhín. Remove the shawl from my neck.
The bride then takes off the chádar, but they tie it to the bride's
shawl (gand chattrúvá), meaning that they are now one.
The girl is bathed, the barber's wife (nain) braids her hair, then she
sits on a (tókra) basket under which is a light. Two pice are placed
under her feet. The one that gives the bath gets the pice. The uncle
gives the girl a cow, etc. Of the earth wetted with the water of the
bath some is thrown to the ceiling. The mother passes before the girl
a large basket inade of reeds seven times. This is called Khárá langáí,
and she then sings :-
Rhárd chittar machittar, The basket is of divers colours,
Khárá addiya,
And I sit on the basket.
Kháre tón utár,
Tako me off the basket,
Mámmá vaddhiya,
Great uncle.



196
Chuhrá weddings.
The girl is taken away, and the bridegroom gives the barbor's wife &
rupee.
The lági is now sent to bring the clothes that the bridegroom has
brought for the bride. Jowels also he brings, and she is fully dressed.
These jewels aro various for the nose, bulák, laung, nath ; ear,
dandián, pattar, chaunké, báló ; neck and throat, hass, hamél, takhtián ;
forehead, chikkún, chaunk, phúl ; arm, ţádár: bówattá, chúrá, gökhrú,
kangan; fingers, chháp or chhallá, ársi ; foot, panjébán, karián.
The bride is now ready aod comes to be married. She is seated
and the Brahman (or the Maulavi) is called. Four poles are stuok in
the ground fastened together, with green branches above, The
Brahman (or Maulaví) reads & service, and two pice are handed seven
times. The Brahman says: Suttó; ékí, méki, néki téki, páó dhangá, and
snaps the pice.
The bridegroom goes round the bride seven times, and she round him
seven times under the green canopy. T'ho Brahman gets four annas
in pice, and one rupee. The married pair sit on a bed or seat, while
the bride's people bring him clothes, which he puts on over the ones
he han. The mirási seizes his turban, and retains it until it is redeemud
with a rupee. The parents are next called, and water is brought to be
sprinkled over the hands of the married pair. She is thus given over
to him. They rise from the chárpái, and go inside, throwing backward
over their heads barley and cotton seede which had been placed in their
laps. They do not take away all the blessing.
A tréwar (21 or 12, etc., pieces) of clothes is now given (khat), all
shown to the assembled guests, and vessels also seven, viz., thál
(platter), chhanná (metal drinking vessel), lóh (large iron baking pan),
haráhí (frying pan), dégchi (pot), karchhí (ladle), dhakná (lid). There
are 21 kallé, or scones, placed in the basket of clothes. The lágís
who take this away receive presents of money. The bridegroom's
father gives alms to the poor at this point, and there is much crying
and weeping as the bride prepares to leave her home.
The bride is put into the dóli (palanquin), and the bridegroom's
father throws money on it, which goes to the poor.
The bridegroom's party return bome carrying the bride with them.
At the bridegroom's house all the women sing at intervals. When
they reach the house the mother is at the door.
The inother has a cup of water in her hand, which she waves round
the heads of the married couple. She then attempts to drink it seven
times, the bridegroom preventing her. At the seventh time she drinks.
Then they enter the house, and the bride is placed on a mat. All the
bridegroom's relations are called, and a large vessel called a parát is
brought, in which is a mixture of rice, ghé and sugar cooked. This is
gótkunálá. The women seat themselves and of this they take a morsel
and each puts a little in the bride's mouth. She, sharm ké máré (out of
shame) refuses to take it, but they insist as they are her relations.
The women all partake. They call this bharmdálá, 1.6., union with
the family. If they do not have this meal, they do not admit the other
party to family privileges.



The Chuhrá muklává.
197
After this the bride remains two days wure in the house, and on the
third and fourth day the women again gather. They take a parát
(tray) in which they put water and milk, or kachchí lussi, and in
another vessel they put áțá (meal). In the meal they put gur and ghi,
mixing them together (gulrá). Into the tray of milk and water they
make the bride put her heel, and in it the bridegroom washes her foot.
The bridegroom now puts in his foot, and she is told to wash it. This
is shagun. The bride unties her gánó (wrist ornament), which is so
securely fastened that they sometimes draw it over the hand, wbile
they sing. It is thrown into the parát of wilk and water. Then the
bridegroom unfastens the bride's gánó.
It is placed in the vessel next. They are fastened together. The
nain (lágin) takes both and turns them round in the water seven times.
She drops thein in the water seven times, the bride and the bridegroom
grabbing at them. The one that succeeds the oftener in getting hold
of them first wins--the caste therefore wins. This is done amid great
laughter. Only women are present, besides the bridegroom.
The flour, ghi and sugar are then divided amongst them. Other
songs are sung when the bride first comes to the house. The girls also
express their opinion of the dowry in a song.
MOKLÁVÁ, OR THE HOME-COMING OF THE BRIDE.
Next day the bride goes back to her father's house, and there is sent
after her kachchi pinni, or kachchi bháji, which is rice floor with sugar.
She returns to her husband's home in six months, or two years, or
three, when there is mukláva, as sending home a wife is called. She
brings a suit of clothes for her husband, one for her mother-in-law,
and one for her father-in-law. She wears kach, i. e:, glass bracelets.
because she is still kachchi (unripe) ; not pakki. She now resides in
her husband's, her own house. Various songs are sung on this occasion.
A few branches of the Chuhrás, including the Sotarwála, celebrate
marriages by the Muhammadan nikah, but the great majority observe
the Hindu phera. The following is a specimen of the songs (chhand or
shlok) sung at a phera :-
Pahlán smirán ek Unkár,
Duje gurú Ganesh,
Tije smirán ádh Bhiwani,
Sat dip nu kund jáni,
Atván ke dil táni sanwáre,
Tin log ke káraj sáre;
Magh pati pith panchami,
Kaho bed ke sáj.
Jis din gaurán ar naye,
Chanda charhe ugás;
Nám lijiyo Ganesh ká,
Ao säjan nistár.
Gayára din se lagan chalaya,
Le hokar gurúdware pati sab par war;
Ghar ghar turi mewa bichár,
Do Pándi bakhshish.



198
Chuhrá buryings.
One or two customs observed by the Chuhrás at marriages deserve
notice :
On the evening when the bridegroom sets out for the bride's house,
his mother cooks 10 sers of rice sweetened with gur, and invites all
the women of the community to eat each a mouthful of it. They
then ask her to give them a chhaj (a sieve for winnowing grain) and a
doi (wooden spoon), and she at once does so. Two or three of the
women, one of whom is wearing a ghaghrá (the lower part of a
petticoat) instead of a frock, get on top of the house with the chháj and
the doi, and the woman in the ghaghrá sings an obscene song at the
top of her voice, beating the chhúj after every stanza so violently
that it is broken to pieces. This custom is termed pharuhá (foolery).
It is an indispensible observance at a wedding.
Last but not least comes the rite of admitting the bride into the
bridegroom's got which is done in this wise :-
Two or three days after the bride's arrival her mother-in-law
prepares a maund and ten sers of sweet rice and serves it up on a
large tray. Seven sohágans (women whose husbands are alive) are
invited, and they eat with the bride out of the tray. Unless this is
done she is not considered a real member of the got.
Bigamy is permissible, that is to say, a man whose wife is barren or
who only gives birth to girls, may take a second wife. But he cannot,
at least in Máler Koțla, take a second wife if he has a son, under
penalty of excummunication, nor can he take a third wife while the
other two are with him.
Divorce is practised.
DEATH AND BURIAL.
The Chuhrás generally bury their dead. When a person is dying
they call in the Muhammadan priest to read the sahani, but if it is in
a Hindu village where there is no mulla pothing of this nature is done,
except that in some cases they lift the sick man on to the ground.* This
they call satthar. The dead are carried to the grave on a bed, bound
in a shroud made of cloth, which is tied at the head and the feet like
a sack, and in the middle. The body, after being washed with soap
and water, is dressed in a jacket, a cap, and a sheet, or in two sheets,
and is sprinkled with rose water. In the grave the shoulder is placed
towards the pole star, and the feet to tne east. If it is that of a young
person they put a black blanket over the bier, if of an old person à
red one. T'his is called khés. The priest sits on the west side and
looks towards the east. He recites a prayer, and they repeat it after
him. This is janáza. One rupee, called askát,I is given to the priest
person they pole star, and the feet to in the grave th
* In Máler Kotla the Chuhțás bury the dead, like Muhammadans, but on their way to
the grave the carriers of tbe bier change places as amoog. Hiodus. And on their retura
they pick up straws and break them, saying, 'God bless the dond and proteot those left
behind', while the faqir, who usually accompanies the parties, recites verses of Gura
Napak, like a Sikh. Three days later the deceased's nearest relative foods the man who
carried the bier, and on the 17th day he distributed food to the poor and to unmarried
girls.
† Satthar, lit., a couch.
| Askát, probably for zakát, alms,



199
The Chuhrá creed.
on the Qurán. A cloth called jáé namáz is also given. The blanket
becomes the property of the mirásí. The face of the dead is not placed
downwards.
If a very old person dies, his friends make a mock mourning : bat
their grief is really very great for a young person.
They (the women)* stand in a circle ; the mírásan (wife of the
family bard) stands in the centre. She sings mournful tunes, the
other women following her. They beat their legs, breasts and fore.
head with their bands in time to the dirge. Nothing could be sadder.
The woman that leads repeats the aláhni, and the other women beat
the breast, thus making siápá.
PURIFICATION RITES.
After child-birth a woman is unclean for 21 days. In the period of
menstruation she does not go to a well, and after it she washes her
clothes and bathes. After a funeral all who may have touched the
dead body or the grave must bathe.
Many Chuhrás reverence sanghar,t in order that sanghat or trouble
may be averted.
Sanghar ká vart.- They have a special favour for Vaishnu Déví.
They put mehndi on girls' hands, and tie a mauli, or cotton bracelet,
round their wrists, feeding the girls also in the devi's name, that the
children may be preserved.
Dévi dá vart.--On Thursday night they have darúd,praying for
the dead. They pour water into a cup, and take bread in their hands.
They eat a little, drink a little, and give the remainder to a child.
They have no special days.
III.--RELIGION.
(a).-THE DEDICATION OF A TEMPLE TO BÁLÁ Shán.
The principal goddesses or dévis of the Hindus, e.g., Kálí Déví,
appear to be of low caste. This is especially noteworthy.
When a shrine is made to Bálá, the Chuhrás make a mound of earth
in which they bury a gold knife, a silver knife, a copper knife, the head
of a goat, and a cocoanut, all bound in 14 yards of red cloth. Having
levelled the mound, or rather dressed it and made it neat and tidy,
they raise on it a sort of altar of mud, in which they make three niches
for lamps. Having put oil in the lamps and lighted them they place
them in the niches. Goat's Qesh is cooked, of which part is eaten and
part distributed to the poor. A chela performs the sacrifice, after
which they all eat together.
The order of religious ceremony is as follows:-A basket (changérá)
is placed near the mud altar; which resembles a raised grave more
than anything else, and in the basket there is chúrmán, made of four.
butter and sugar. In front of the altar the chela burns ghí with spices,
such as camphor. He sprinkles the assembled company with lassi
appezonen a shrine is megold knife, and in 14 yards. ade it neat and niches
* The women go half-way towards the graveyard weeping and wailing,
† Sanghar is the pod of the jand tree, which is used as a vegetable by the poorer classes,
especially in times of scaroity.
I Darúd fátia-obsequies.



200
Chuhrá lays.
(butter milk or rather whęy) for cooling purposes. Five pice are puu
in the ghi, which become the chela's, as a fee. Silver or gold is put
in a cup of water and the water is sprinkled on the people. This is
called chands. The chela stands before the altar, the poople standing
behind him, while he recites a dedicatory litany.
The Chnhrás have a lofty conception of Bálmík, and believe that
when he honoured the earth with his existence all the regions of
heaven and earth were illuminated as described in the following
verses, current in Máler Koțla :-
Uth Mátá Maináwanti* sutie, Bábe Bále lia Arise, mother Maináwantí, from slumber,
autar.
Babá Bálá has been incarnated.
Dhamak pați Paitál men : chhuti gard ghobár. A trembling has come upon Paitál, the dust
has come off.
Chartán ái Kumbá te Khwaiá di pukár ! : Armies have come from Kumbát shouting
for Khwajá!
Kuhián, machh, chiphore, ud ud mange más Kuhián,t machh, chishore and tanduet fly
tandue.
and demand flesh.
Chher chhiſi Ganesh di Derá Gházi Khán. The war of Ganesh has been declared at
| Dora Ghếzi Khán.
Jotán jalen akás ud ud baithke jagá lie The heaven was illuminated with lamps, the
| masản.
burnt dead have been revived.
Munh kajiale (kandiale=curb) sár de kukki Riding on a brown mare with iron curb in
keli de aswár.
her mouth.
An khaſe Godhan tapashi Darbár.
Godhan, the hermit, has come at the door.
Runde san de lagám die, ankan sankan kán. The bridle of the mare is of hempen rope and
her ears decorated with ankan sankan.
An kharote Godhan. tapashi band kharotá Godhan, the hermit, is standing with his joined
háth.
hands.
Chherán de agwán úbal mange, hun bal The leader of the armies applies for more
mange sandeh dá.
strength.
Dhián Karáhi churma aur bakre-sakre wahi I offer kaſáhi churmall and goats. He is
ik !
the One!
The two following songs are sung in honour of Giljhaprá, one of the
titles by which Lál Beg is known :-
Bism illáhir Rahmán-ir-Rahim!
In the name of God, the most merciful and
compassionate !
Bir par dast Pir Murshid dá, sábit rahe Be on thy head the hand of the priest, the
yaqin.
spiritual guide; be thy faith perfect.
Rarın to Karima!
Bounty (springs) from bountiful God!
Rám to Rahima !
Compassion** from the Compassionate!
Neki tán Nekáhil di.
There is no goodness like that of Níkáhíl.tt
Azmat tán Azázíl di.
There is no glory like that of Azázíl. II
Daur tan Isráfil di.
There is no swiftness like that of Israfil.88
Zamin de dalíche : asmán de samete : simat Even beneath the earth, even on the summit
simal tú.
of the heavens: thou art found everywhere.
Bådshahat Muhammad di ujmo barkat deo! Empire is Muhammad's, the Bestower of
greatness and blessing!
Ap itigád de málik, zikar sune the sáre. Thou art the sole master of the faith, who
hadst heard everything.
Khair tán Alláh Ta'ala di, Nis Ta’álá dí. Welfare comes from God, the Most High,
* Mother of Gopichand.
† Probably the name of a place.
* These are animals, bat of what kind is not known.
$ An ornament worn by horses,
j A kind of sweet cooked food.
| The first of these songs is clearly a variant of the Dedicatory Litany given by Dr.
Youngson,
*** Rám," a corruption of “Raham " "compassion."
ft Nikábil, for Míkáíl, the arcbangel Michael.
İf Azázíl, the fallen angel, now called Shaitán.
ŠŠ Isráfil, the archangel wbr. will sound the trumpet to destroy the whole world on the
last day.



Chuhrá lays.
201
Dáman Bibi Fátima de.
The skirt * of Fátima (is most trustworthy).
Chhatar tán Dilli dá.
There is no crown like that of the Delh
empire.
Tabá tán Makke dá.
There is no tabát like that of Makká.
Aimer tán Zinda huaja Mauj Dím đi. Ajmer belongs to the ever-living Khwájá
Maujdín.I
Hazrat Kátí Katalmín manukh tan de. Hazrat Kátí Katalmin of manukh tan †
Awwal ainán ik nastu.
The first faith is the first nastunt
Dom amán do nastu.
The second faith is the second nastu.
Tiáram antrin ta nastu.
The third faith is the third nastu.
Cháram amán lip nastu.
The fourth faith is the lipt of nastu.
Awwal Pír Asá.
The first Pir is Ásá.
Dom Pir Hazrat Khwájá Khásá.
The second Pír is His Majesty Khwájá Khása ||
Som Per Safá.
The third Pír is Safá.
Chóram Pír Dádá Giljhaprá..
The fourth Pír is father Giljhapſá.
Pet nun roti tan nun kaprá!
Bread is to the belly, clothing to the body.
Nezá to dumáun !
I bend the spear!
Sadá sadá bánkrá jáun !
I go joyfully for ever and ever.
Pír merá jamiá : sab pirán laộ páyá. My Pír has been born and committed to the
charge of all the Pírs.
Juggs topi Màá Gauria** Leke pahuduc. Mother Gaurjá put on him a jhaggá and a cap.
Yeh mubárki Alláh Nabi nun áí.
Congratulation to God and the Prophet.
Wáh wáh jí mere shih di sámali, bel vahut How excellent it is, my Lord ! Thou hast
si barhát.
greatly increased my Saint's progeny.
Bále shah Nuri.
The god-like Bále Sháh.
Haidar Shah Nuri.
The go:I-like Haidar Shah.
Habbut Taráló Nuri.
The ged-like Ilabbut Ta'ala.
Maula Mushkil-kusho Dákhdúkh Nuri. The god-like Maula Mushkil-kushátt Dákhdákh.
Takht bukht Rabbul Almin Nurí.
The Heavenly Preserver of the Worlds, (Lord
of, throne and wealth.
Bálů Sháh Nuri kihite bete ?
Whose son is Balá Shah Nuri?'
Amir Shah Nuri de bete.
'(He is son) of the god-like Amír sháh.
Amir Shah Nuri kihde bete?
• Whose son is the god-lika Amír Shah?'.
Haidar Shah Nuri de bete.
Of the god-like Haidar Shah.'
Haidar Shah Nuri kihde bete ?
Whose son is the god-like Haidar Shah?'
Habbut Ta'alá Nuri de bete.
Of the Heavenly Habbut Ta’álá.'
Habbut Ta'ala Nuri kihde hete ?
'Whose son is the Heavenly Habbut Ta'ala ?'
Maulá Mushkil.kushá Dákhdukh de bete, Of the god-like Maula Mushkil.kushá Dákh.
dakh.
Marla Mushkil-kushá kihde bete ?
Whose son is Maula Mushkil-kushá ?'
Takht bakht Rabbul Alinin Nurê de bete. Of the Heavenly Preserver of the Worlds.'
Wúh wáh jí Sat Jug men kí bhánu bartaya ? How excellent, sir ! How was a vat used in
the Sat Jug?
Sonne dá ghat, sonne dá mat :
Golden waterpot, golden dome:
Sonne dá ghorá, sonne dá jorá,
Golden horse, golden clothes,
Sonne di kunji, sonne dá tálá, sonne de kiwúr Golden is the key, golden is the padlock, and
golden are the door-leaves.
Dakkhan munh morí," uttur munh díwár Entrance to the south, wall to the north!
Láo kunji kholo kiwar
Bring the key and open the door.
Le mere sachche Dúdú Pir de didár
Behold my true t'ather Saint
Shahansháh be parwal,
The independent King of Kings,
Wohí ik Alláh,
He alone is the one God,
Tere nám dá pallá,
In Thy name is my refuge,
Tu záhir nám ik Alláh
Thou art evidently one God.
Wáh! wáh! jí! Tretá en kyi bháná How excellent, sir! How was a vat used in the
bartáyá ?
Treta ?
Chum Á dù ghat, Cádi đá nát:
Silver waterpot, silver dome.
Chúndí dá ghord, Chandí dá jorá,
Silver horse, silver clothes,
Chándi di kunji, Chándí dá tálá, Chándi Silver is the key, silver is the padlock, and
di kiwár
silver are the door:leaves.
* Lit. skirt, so'protectiou.'
† Meaning unknown.
# The correct pame is Muín-ud-Din Chishti.
§ ása=Isá, Jesus Christ.
✓ Khwájá Khizr.
| Safá, it is not known who this Safá was,
** Párbati, wife of Shiv.
tt Remover of difficulties.



202
Chuhrá lays.
Uttar munn mori, dakkhan munh diwár,.. Entrance to the north, wall to the south,
Láo kumjá kholo kieuoay,
Bring the key and open the door,
Le mere sachche Dádá Per de didár,
Behold my true Father Saint,
Shahanshah be parwah,
The independent King of Kings,
Wohi ik Alláh.
He alone is the one God.
Tere nám dá pallá,
In Tby name is my refuge,
Tu záhir nám ik Alláh.
Thou art evidently one God.
Kijo khairsalá.
Grant us welfare.
Jumlá fuqron ka ishq Allah,
All the saints love God.
Wah ! xoah ! 6 ! Ducipar Jug mem kợá bánd How excellent, sir! How was a vat used in
bartává ?
the Dwápar Jug?
Támbe dá ghat, támbe dá mat :
Brazen water.pot, brazen dome :
Támbe dá ghorá, támbe dá joſá,
Brazen horse, brazen clothes,
Támbe di kunji, támbe dă tálá, támbe de Brazen is the key, brazen is the padlock and
kiwár
brazen are the door-leaves.
Purab munh mori, pachham mukh diwár, Entrance to the east, wall to the west,
Láo kunjt kholo kiwari
Bring the key and open the door,
Lo mere sachhe Dádá Pír de didár,
Behold my true Father Saint,
Shahanshah be parwah,
The independent King of Kings,
Wohi ik Alláh.
He alone is the one God.
Tere nám dá pallá,
In Thy name is my refuge,
Tu záhir nám ik Allah !
Thou art evidently one God!
Wáh! wah! jt! Kal Jug men kyá bhánd How excellent, sir! How was a vat used in the
bartáyá.
Kal Jug?
Mitti dá ghat, mittí dá mat :
Earthen water-pot, earthen dome :
Mitti dá ghorá, mittr dá joſá,
Earthen horse, earthen clothes,
Mitti di kungi, mițți dá tálá, mitți de kiwar. Earthen is the key, earthen the padlock and
earthen the door leaves.
Pachham munh mori, purab munh diwár, Entrance to the west, wall to the east,
Láo kuni kholo kiuán.
Bring the key and open the door,
Lo mere sachhe Dádá Pir de didár,
Behold my true Father Saint,
Sháhanshah be parwah,
The independent King of Kings,
Wohi ik Alláh.
He alone is the one God,
Tere nám dá pallá,
In Thy name is my refugė,
Tu záhir nám ik Alláh!
Thou art evidently one God!
Wáh! wáh! ji ! Lálo Lál karenge nihál How excellent! Lálo Lál will exalt us,
Ghaſi ghari de káțenge kál.
(He) will remove the difficulties of every
moment.
Lál ghorá, lál jorá :
Red is the horse, red are the clothes :
Lál kalghí, lál nishan,
Red is the plume, red is the standard,
Lál tambu, lál pahilwán,
Red is the tent, red is the wrestler,
Lál mai:lán,
Red is the field;
Sonne di tokri ; rupe dá jhaſú : gal phulon Of gold is the basket, of silver the broom :
de hár.
garland of flowers on the neck.
Já khare hote sachhe Sahib de Darbár (He) attends the court of the True Lord :
Kijiye chhutkárá.
Release us.
ali sáhib Paighambar Duldul sangárá: The prophet Ali equipped his Duldul :*
Khabar hui Dánon nu kitá dilkárá.. The giants heard of it and made a noise.
Yá Pírji, merá bhí dil kurtá hai jang men O Lord ! I too have a desire, I will certainly
chalúngá karárá.
march bravely in the battlefield.
Chúngi to miwálú.
Chungi to niwala.
Sarsabz rahe dumálá.
May the dumálú remain green.
Arash pe kurush men dhuni pá baithe, Nuri By the 'Throne of God on the Arsh the god-like
Shah Bálá.
Bálá Shah lighted fire and sat there (extort-
ing compliance with what he wanted from
God).
Arash te uttará ghará wa piálá,
From Heaven came down a pitcher and a cup,
Hukm Mua Samal Beg mu Đá gai, huá An order being given to Sámali Beg, he drank
matwálá
it up and was intoxicated.
Siraſić, Ogațiú, sahná bídá karná ik kinárá, O! Siraria! Ugatia! Dismiss and avert our
difficulties.
Sár dí chhari Multán di kumán, indal hastí Of sál, I the stick, the bow from Multán; the
zard ambári.
tuskless elephant, and yellow (golden) seat
with the canopy.
* The name of All's horse.
† Meaningless phrase.
& Tho sál tree is the shorea robusta.



Chuhrá lays.
203
Ai Dádá Lál Beg snrhche Sat Gur Wali di Came riding on the Father Lál Beg, the truo
sawari,
Saint and Prophet,
Ao Muản Lễ Khám Darbird.
Welcome. 0 Lil Khán, thou courtier.
Sattar do bahattar balá tumhare panje tale Seventy plus two, i.e., seventy-two evils (were)
mári !
destroyed under thy hand!
Chhánunge dudh dá dudh, pání dá pání. Thou wilt separate water from milk.*
Toshá wa kalárvá, bhet hai tumhárí ; kuchh Provisions and a silk skein are offered to thee,
kijo madad hamári.
vouchsafe us a little help.
Shah de tukht, Multán di kumán, indal hasti, On the royal throne, with the Multán bow, in a
zard ambári,
golden howdah, on a tuskless elephant,
Ai Dádá Lál Beg sachche Sat Gur Wali di Came the Father Lál Beg, the true Saint and
,bawári.
Prophet.
do Miyán Lál Rhán Darbári,
| Welcome, O Lái Khán, darbari,
Sarwar di shahidi Hazrat dá kalimá pák. By the testimony of Sarwar, by the holy
Kalímá of Muhammad,
“ Lá ilaha ill-illáho; Mohammad-ir-Rasúl-ul. None is worthy of being worshipped but God;
laho."
and Muhammad is His Prophet.
(2). Another runs as follows:-
Awwal Pír Ásá.
The first Pír is Ásá.
Dom Pír Khúsá.
The second Pír is Khásá.
Som Pír Sáfá.
The third Pír is Sáfá.
Cháram Pír Giljhapşá.
The fourth Pír is Giljhapſá.
Hare dá mal, jité dá pahilwán, sarjan The friend of the defeated, the hero of the
ummat pai!
victorious, (he) has followers of repute !
Sachche Shahe kalá tikáí.
The true saint has done this miracle.
Jis din Mirán Shah janamiá, chaudán When Mírán Shah was born the fourteen
tabaq hoí rushnái !
regions were illuminated!
Thápi mili Muhammadon !
He received a pat from Muhammad !
Baváí milí Paighambron !
He was glorified by the Prophet!
Jhotá jamiá ban-khande men; chhuțá phirá The malo-buffalot was born in the wilderness
Dargah ich maqtulo báng sau đó,
and strayed in God's court: from the slain a
call was heard,
" Kholo háwan topi chírá" : hurán mangal The virgins of Paradise sang joyfully “Kholo
gáſ.
báwan topí chirá.-"
Tale bage jindá Doriyáo, jithe pire ashnán Below flows the life-giving river where the
lagái.
saint bathed.
Ochche dalíche satranjián, jithe pire mál Above were spread carpets and rugs whereon
| mái.
the saint was seated.
Sone di tokrí; rupe dá jhárú,
Golden is the basket; silver is the broom,
Ki khandi hai tokri ; kí khar.di hai jhárú ? What says the basket; what says the broom ?
Tokri khandi hai "pák dar pák :"
The basket says "pure and clean":
Jhárú khandi hai "khák dar khák.”
The broon says "dirt and dust."
Jháſú jhaſmián díl kar safá !
Sweep with the broom, clean the heart !
Le boriá ah de dere ná jáe.
Take the mat and go to his dwelling.
Rás di kunjí ? Rás dá tálá ?
Of what is the key ? Of what is the lock ?
Kaun hai kholnewálá?
Who is the opener ?
Ishq di kunji, prem dá tálá,
Of 'love' is the key, of love' is the lock:
Jibrail hai kholnewálá ;
Jibráíl is the opener ;
Wohí ik hai.
He is the One.
All now seat themselves, and then the ghi having been burnt and hom.
thus offered, the chúrmán, made of flour, sugar and ghí, is distributed
to the worshippers. The changerá, or basket, is carried round. Some
of the churmán is given to the dogs, some to the crows, some to the
cows, some to the old women, and then the people eat, beginning wit)
the most wealthy and respectable. The wrestler for Shah Eli gets a
share. The remainder is given to friends in the neighbourhood who are
absent. A collection of money is also taken.
While they are seated, two stools are placed by the altar, and near
them four cakes, of dried cowdung are lighted, so that the drummer
* To separate water from milk, i.e., to administer the highest jastice,
† The male-buffalo denoting Lál Beg.
I This phrase means “spread the 52 turbans,"



204
The Chuhrá priests.
may dry his rabbana (tambourine) when it becomes limp. It being
evening the two chelas sing to the rabbana (tambourine) and the dotára
(fiddle). The drum is heated until it gives a ringing sound when
beaten, the dotára goes (as one of the men expressed it) bin, bin, bin,
bin, the rabbana, gham, gham, gham, gham, and all are ready. Bulanda
comes and says, “ Pir Bashk is here and so is Nának, but where is the
lame man? He is lying in the house, is he? What will he be able to
tell to-morrow morning ?” The farmers gather round and ask them
what they are singing. Th-y answer : “Let us sing the five attributes
of God, and then we shall have leisure to speak to you."
The chelas get their fees and go. Every year after the crop is
gathered in Hár, they go through this service, with the exception of the
making of the shrine, the butti on the thará (the altar on the platform).
IV.-RELIGIOUS BELIEFS.
.(a).-PRIESTS.
With respect to their priests, whose names are Bálá Shah, Márkhande.
Míán Súrá, Lál Beg, Bálmík, Jhaumpſá, Pír Jhotá, Gungar Beg, Åil
Malúk, they look on them as autârs (incarnations) of the one Bála,
Jhaumprá in one of these traditions is called by Alif Chéla, the tenth
incarnation,
The priests are called pír, and do duty at marriages and funerals. At
marriages the mirási (bard) places a divá, lamp of áțá (dough) in a
clean place and the people bow before it, while he says that the jöt, or
light of their ancestors, is being burnt.
Their faqirs or sádhús are wháh Madárí, Naushahiyá, Nangesháhiya,
Yatímsháhiya, Bairágí. The Shah Madáriya has a lit, or bodi, and a
rosary. The Naogesháhiya have long hair plaited with bor ká dudh
(the milk of the banyan tree) and washed with earth. They bind it
round the head with a cord of wool, and wear over it a turban of yellow
cloth. They wear a large bead over the forehead. They go naked for
twelve years, having the person smeared with ashes,
The Bairágí is dressed much like the Nangesháhiya, but he carries a
bairágan, or prop, on which he sits.
The Naushábiya has the hair united. He wears a rosary, and on the
wrist an ornament called a gajrá. His clothes are yellow-whatever
he has of clothes.
The Yatímsháhiya is like the Bairágí.
The faqirs' work is to expel evil spirits with their mantras (incanta-
tions).
(b).- ARTICLES OF FAITH.
The tenets of their religion are especially-
1. Sin is a reality. 2. There is one God. 3. Bálá is a mediator.
Sáddi kúk teré aggé,
Our cry is to theo ;
Teri kúk dhur Dargáé.- Amin. Thy cry reaches the presence of God.
4. They sacrifice an animal, and also present offerings of corn, gur,
ghi. It is cooked and piaced on the shrine. It is called kasáhi.



Chuhrá beliefs.
205
by ceste ih Chubhra o treaca weddieronited from
ret ried also chúramica the gyár
The gyáni, chela or priest, stands in front, the congregatiou behind
him. When the gyání (knowing one) says, 'Bolo, momino, sarbgati,
they say, " Amin, sarbgati,' i.e., 'let all have salvation. The victim
sacrificed is a fowl or a goat according to their means. It is called
Allah dá Nám (God's Name). The food is distributed and eaten, and
the panj sifaten (five attributes) are sung.
5. The spirit returns to God.
6. There will be a resurrection of the body.
7. There will be judgment.
8. There are angels.
The priests of the Chuhțás are recruited from various sources. Thus
in many parts of Gurgaon weddings are performed by pádhas, who
will eat with Chuhrás, though they are probably degraded Brahmans
by caste, like the Chamarwá. See also LÁLBEGI-
(c).-SARINES.
The shrine in a village always faces the east. Its shape is a dome,
or, as they say, gáo dum ki shakal (like a cow's tail), a pright. There
are only lamps in it, no idols. The name of the shrine is Bělá Shah.
(d).-Rites.
They have no secret rites. Their shrine is worshipped on Thursdays,
sacrifices are offered, and also chúrmán (a sweetmeat made of bread
crumbs mixed with butter and sugar), and the gyání prays. It is only
at the consecration of a new shrine that the head of the animal sacrificed
and knives are buried under the shrine. The shrine is built on the
sacrifice and sacrificial weapons, as a foundation.
There is no ceremony for admission among the Chuhrás, except
participating in the kaſáhi.
(e). --SACRIFICES.
The animal sacrificed is a fowl, a goat, and perhaps a cow,
The gyání, or a Muhammadan mulla, offers the sacrifice.
The sacrifice is offered not near the shrine but at a little distance
from it. It is cooked and eaten. They also burn ghi, rál or scented
resin,* and guggal (a gum, used as incense). This is called hóm.
When a child is born, he is brought on the twenty-first day and
offered or consecrated to Bálmík, and called Bálmík kú bór. He is a
nazar, or offering
(f).- FETISHISM.
Belief in spirits is geueral. A spirit may attach itself to a roof and
break it, or to a well and throw a man in, or to animals and they will
attack and injure map. A bad rúh (an evil-spirit) may meditate mischief
and God sends a warning. This is called sabháwak (of good intent).
Good spirits attach themselves to wood and other things, especially
cooking vessels. They bring blessings.
Fields are haunted and may accordingly be barren.
, as 90. Theodofri prepade of brlays,
* Rál, resin of tho Shorea robusta.



206
Chuhrá beliefs.
desice powers has been the
who called the maras time to distance, have given, found herbal karliyá
night, we stretched his side. He rupee. The latene disappeared.
(g).-ANCESTOR-WORSHIP.
The Chuhrás fear the spirit of a woman who dies in childbirth,
because she has become a churel, a witch that is to be dreaded. Faqirs
have power over spirits and receive information from them of the
desigos of the spirit world,
Bad dreams come from the dabái (the pressure) of an evil spirit. To
drive the evil spirits away Bálmík's name is taken. Sickness is caused
by bad rúh ká sáyá (the shadow of an evil spirit). Faqirs and pirs
drive away spirits with jhárá* karauņá, jhár phúnkt (conjuring).
Ghosts of the dead haunt houses, burial grounds, etc. They come as
little boys with white hair. Not long since in this neigbourhood two
children straged from home in the grey dawn and were seen by some
of the villagers, who, not recognising them as children of the village,
were terrified at the sight of them, believing them to be ghosts. I
understand that the children ran some risk of being treated harshly, if
not killed, as evil-intentioned ghosts.
Churels have their feet pointing backwards. They have long paps
which they throw over their shoulders. Their hair is long, and face
beautiful. A dyer was returning home one day, when he met a churel,
who accompanied hiin to his house. She was very attractive, for she
concealed the marks by which he would have recognised her. But at
night, when it was time to put out the light, she did it with her hand,
which she stretched to such a distance that the dyer in terror found
he had a churel by his side. He would have given the alarm, but she
threatened him and gave him a rupee. The faqir found her out, howe
ever, being set to do it by the dyer's friends. Usne use qábú karliya
(he caught her). She then asked for her rupee and disappeared.
If a woman dies before giving birth to her child, she certainly
becomes an evil-spirit. When they bury her, they put a nail through
her hands and her feet, and put red pepper on her eyes. They place a
chain round her ankles and so bury her. On the way home they sow
seti saron (white mustard) that it may blind her. They have túná for
her, i.e., charms, otherwise she would come and hurt every one in the
house." This is a fact,” said my informant emphatically !
At a certain stage of the incantations the chelá says, " Are you
going?” The spirit says, “ Yes, but I want a fowl, & goat, a piece of
cloth, etc." This is given, and the bad spirit goes.
There are several kinds of spirits, churel, bhút, khavis, jinn, deó, pari.
The churel we have described. The parís are churels when they come
in companies. A fagir, who dies within his twelve years of faqiri,
becomes a bhút, or a kharis, or a jinn, or a deó. If he dies in his forty
days of fasting, when he comes to eat one grain a day, he becomes a
Ichavís or a jinn, or a deó.
TOTEMS.
Lauing (clove) I is the name of one of the ancestors in the clan of
Goriyé. It is especially revered.
he had ned him and her be the dyer's her rupee and
* Lit. 'sweep away.'
t Lit. 'blow away.
Also a nose stud or orna mont.



onde urmoy, it is is a good him lie
Chuhrú omens and oaths.
207
Among the Gils, the baingyan (egg plant) is particularly noticed.
The chief's name was Parth, so they do not eat the part* (rind) of the
baingyan.
Woinen never take the name of their zát (caste) on their lips.
V. -SUPERSTITIONS.
OMNS AND NAMES.
If a Chubrá goes on a journey and meets a mirási, he goes back,
If some one calls after him he goes back. The braying of a donkey
meeting him is a good oinen. If a washerman meets a man beginning
a journey, it is sufficient to send him back, certain of failure if he goes
on. Some men are known to carry good fortune, and are sent out to
meet travellers.
A Chuhrá never steps over a broom. The broom that is used to sweep
corn is hung up on a nail in the house. That for ordinary use is placed
on a grave, but never upright.
Children are frequently given names arising out of superstitions : thus,
Káká is used as a first name. Ghasítá means dragged, that is, dragged
over a dust heap, rúri. Rúrá has the same meaning. As the name is
ono of dishonour, the evil-eye will not fall on the children that bear it.
Líkar mears having half of the head shaved, and the other not; this is
to keep the child alive. Nathú means having a ring in the nose, to
hold him and keep him from going away, i.e., dying.
OATES, MAGIC AND WITCHCRAFT,
The oath by Balá Shah is used.
The practice of magic arts is confined to faqirs and pírs. It is the
sauhriot that bring evil-spirits. A person possessed is cured in the
following manner :--The faqir takes a drum, a thóli or platter and a
ghará or earthen jar. The platter is placed over the jar, and the whole
is called gharidl. The faqir beats the drum, another person beats the
gharial, and others sing. The sick person shakes his head, and when
the uzusio (7) ceases they ask him questions: “Who are you ?" "I am
so and so," he replies. "How did you come into this state ?" "Such
änd such a one put me into this state." * Who bewitched you ?? « So
and so." "What did be get for doing it?** So many rupees.” « For
how long are you sick? "I have to be sick so many days, and then
die is They play and sing again. After a time the sick man perspires
and recovers. The ovil--pirit goes with the perspiration.
A curious and ropulsivo core is used among Hindus and probably
others. It is called jari or masúti. An unmarried person dies, and his
or her body is burnt at the burning ghát. A faqir takes some of the
ashes from the burning pile, goes to the hills for a certain plant, and
makes bread of these two ingredients 011 à grave. The bread is mado
into pills, one of which is given to a naked childless woman. She gives
the pill in a drink to her enemies, and herself has a child. Her barren
condition was caused by au evil-spirit. Masúr means demon, and burn-
ing-place among Hindus,
* Purt is the formn given in Maya Singh's Panjúbi Dictionary, p. 877.
† Sauhri-í, lit. (1) parents-in-law; (2) simpleton, wrotch,
Ghariál, lit, 2 gong.
4
7
3
IN



208
Chuhțá social customs.
Jhundá is an iron whip which & faqir beats himself with for the
sake of another, so that the evil-spirit in him may be troubled and flee.
They also burn oil in a tavá (iron dish). The fagir puts his hand in
the bot oil and pours it on his person. The evil-spirit feels it, but the
faqir does not. The faqir also beats his body with a millstone. After
the sick man recovers, the faqir takes a fowl, kills it, dips a string in
its blood, knots the string, blows on it, and finally binds it round the
sick man's neck, assuring him that the evil-spirit will not come again.
If the man goes where there is impurity (sútak) the virtue in the string
disappears.
Dreams are from evil-spirits, and the Chubļas fear them. To dream
that a person who is dead is cutting flesh, is an intimation that there
will be a death in the house. Muhammadan Sayyids give the ta’wis (a
charm) to keep away dreams.
The evil eye is universally believed in. Some men are very injurious
in this way. If a man with the evil eye looks at any one taking food,
sickness follows. To cure this, the sick person asks a bit from the
evil.eyed man when he is at a meal. The morsel given acts as a cure.
When a cow is sick, and gives no milk, they give her a bit of the
evil-eyed (bad nazr) man's food.
Sorcerers and witches act on their victim by making a figure of him
and torturing the figure by inserting a needle into it. The torture
reaches the person who is personated. Nails and hairs are carried
away to be subjected to pain that the original owners may be tormented.
They are carefully thrown away when cut off, lest any enemy should
get possession of them. Women are especially careful in this parti-
colar.
Sickness is caused by evil spirits.
CEREMONIAL PROHIBITION OR TABOO.
The Chuhrás never touch a Gagra, or a Sánsí, gipsy. Women and
children do not go near graves. The daughter-in-law never mentions
the father-in-law's name. Chuhrás do not eat monkeys, or snakes, or
jackals, or rats.
AGRICULTURAL SUPERSTITIONS.
Crops are cut on a Sunday, Monday, or Friday, and sown on a
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday.
. If the Chuhțás burn a súp (winnowing sieve or fan) in a village, the
farmer is injured. It is a curse—the curse of the poor.
SOCIAL CUSTOMS.
The household eat together, but the women eat after the men. If
men eat after women they are injured, because women are weak of
intellect.
Yá júth ya jhúth, dónói nuqsán pahuchánde:' Food touched by
others and falsehood are both injurious. They use sharáb (strong
drink), opium (afím, post, bhang) and charas. Drunkards are despised.
CUSTOMS OF SOCIAL INTERCOUBSE.
In salutation, they say pairie pan to the great, the answer being terá
bhalá kare Khuda. Also mathá tekná, salám.



Chahrá vocations.
209
CUSTOMS BEARING ON SOCIAL STATUS.
They eat pakki among themselves, and kachchi with Gagro and
Sánsis. They smoke only among themselves. No caste above them
eats with them.
VI.-OCCUPATION.
THE ORIGINAL WORK OF THE CHOHŘÁS.
They were the tanders of the village communities, and ased to live
in huts at a distance from the village, the walls of which were made of
bones, and the roof of skins. When an animal died, the Hindus beat a
drum to let them know that they must come and carry off the dead
body. Five rupees was the fee given and also a shroud. The
Chuhrás took off the animal's hide and ate its flesh. Sweeping was
also their work.
Formerly, when a Hindu died, the Chuhrás received a sheet or
kafan (shroud), and they still receive clothes. In the old days they
got five rupees at the Hindu burning-place, and exacted it with clubs.
If a cow dies on a Hindu's land they call it dúshna, and the Hindu
who takes the cow's tail to the Ganges to be purified is beaten there by
a Chuhșá with a shoe.
VII.--RELATIONS TO LAND.
Nowadays their work is farm service. They are landless day-
labourers on the farm. They are divided into-
(1) The áthrî, who gets a maund of wheat for every máni at the
harvest; also odds and ends. He has ghundiár, pír de dane, the barley
that is sown in a strip round the wheat field; wheat sown by the water.
course ; bread twice a day; clothes and shoes twice a year; töbacco;
vegetables and wood :
(2) The sep khulli, who receives three-quarters of a maund for every
mání, and bread daily if he goes to a distance to work; and
(3) The wife, who takes away dung from the farmyard, and receives
half a maund of corn.
It was cow-burying that led to their isolation. They say the Machhí,
the Jhíwar, the Chuhrá, the Changar, and the Mirásí are all of the
same caste, but have different occupations.
There is a story told of the Chuhrás by Muhammadans and others
that does not reflect to their credit. They are believed to be inclined
to be uppish and to forget past favours, being ungrateful, and are
supposed to work best when they are well beaten, otherwise they take
advantage of the kindness of their masters. I give this oply as the
opinion of their neighbours.
The story is that once on a time the king of the Chuhrás met Moses,
who was on his way to talk with God.* The king of the Chubrás asked
Moses to carry a petition to God from him, that he might be enabled to
take the usual tax from people passing through his territory. Moses
accordingly presented the king's petition, but God said, " Moses, you do
day; clothesat field; wheapír de dáno, mini at the
the They and others call Moses Mihtar Músá; onihtar being a title of distinction, although
used mostly for the Chahrás.



210
Chunian
Churáha.
not know what you are doing, you do not know this people. They will
turn on you, and dishonour you in the end." But Moses persevered,
and obtained for the Chuhrá king what he desired, viz., that he should
levy taxes on travellers. The next time Moses passed that way he
was accosted in a most humiliating manner. “Oh Músri, are you the
man that carried a petition for me? You must pay the dues."' “ Did
I not tell you, Moses," said God, "that you would bring dishonour on
your head. They bave no gratitude.".
. IX.-THE TRADITIONS OF THE CHUHRAS.
The Chuhrás have oral traditions which they recite at their gather-
ings. If a Chuhſá wishes to learn them, he becomes the disciple of some
one who is in possession of tbem, i. e., who can repeat them from
memory. I beard, however, that there was a book of the Chuhrás in
Gujranwala District, but I was unable to obtain it, as the owners had
the idea that I would use it to their disadvantage.
CHUNIAN, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
CAURÁni is the generic name for the people of the Churáh wizárat, in Chamba
State, who include Brahmans, Rájputs, Thákurs, Ráthis, and the follow-
ing low castes :-Halís, Kolís, Sippís, Barwálas, Lohárs, Chamárs,
Dómnas, Riháras, Chanáls, Meghs, etc. The low castes are all endog-
amous.
Tradition makes the Thákurs descendants of the old Ránás, or petty
chieftains, who held Chamba, prior to the foundation of the State by the
Rájás, and the Hális, its oldest inhabitants. It also makes the Brahmans
immigrants from Brahmaur and the Rájputs from the plains ; but the
Ráthis preceded these two castes, having been expelled from the Dugar
country by Gugga Chauhan-à curious legend.
Marriage among the Churáhis is adult, and women are allowed every
license before marriage. Three degrees on either side, counting from
the grandparents, are avoided, but otherwise there are fow restrictions,
Brahmans intermarrying with Ráthis, by both forms of marriage, and
also with Rájputs and Thákurs. Polyandry is not recognized, but polygamy
is, and the first or head wife (bari loirí*) is given Rs. 6 when a second
wife is admitted into the house. This fee is called jethưáght.
· The observances at betrothal are simple. The initiative is taken by
the boy's people, and the binding rite consists in the boy's agents placing
eight Chambá coins, worth nearly 2 annas, in the plates used for enter-
taining the bride's rubárús or representatives, and giving one rupee
for ornaments to the girl.
Marriage is of three kinds. In the superior form, called janáít, the per-
liminaries are as follows:--Some six months before the wedding the boy's
father or brother goes to the girl's house with one or two friends and gives
her father Rs. 7 and a goat as his lág. A rupee is also given to the
bride to buy ornaments, and this is called bandhá denáll. If the parents
* Lári = wife.
+ Fr. jetha, elder and wagh, a share.
i Janái (zání marriage), janái appears to be a diminutira,
Lág, a customary due,
Bandhá - jewellery.



Weddings in Churáh.
211
agree, an auspicious day is fixed for the wedding, and a day before it two
messengers (chámu*) from the bride's house come to fetch the boy, who
worships the family deva or devi. Next day, accompanied by a few friends
and one of the dhamu, he goes to the bride's house. One of the boy's
menial Hális accompanies him, carrying the badháit, a present of two
mánist of grain, to her father. This Háli is called putriárg. On his
arrival at the entrance the boy worships the kumbh || (a vessel full of
water); throwing two copper coins into it and then seating himself on a
blanket placed near the wall. The bride's sister now has a mimic fight
with him and does not let him sit down till he has paid her two annas.
This is called bishkl. She then fetches the bride and seats her by the
boy whose future brother-in-law brings a vessel of boiled rice which he
and the boy's brother scatter over the floor. This is called bhát
chingána**. The pair are then seated, as are the guests, and a feast with
songs and dancing follows. The bride's dowry called suajtt is then given
to her by her parents. In the afternoon the boy's party returns to his
house with two or three of the girl's friends, and the bride herself and
other men and women of the bride's party. Before leaving the threshold
of the bride's house the ceremony of ártiff is performed, a lighted lamp
being waved four times round the head of the pair by a priest, who
recites verses from the Suklámber and Deo Lilá. At the boy's house this
observance is repeated, and the kumbh worshipped by the bride and
bridegroom, at the door. Then the boy's mother lifts up the bride's veil
and presents her with a rupee or half a rupee according to her position.
This is called ghundus $ khará karná. After this a feast is eaten and
another feast given on the following day, and songs and dances performed.
The binding portion of the ceremony is when árti is waved round the
couple's heads at the boy's house. At his wedding the boy wears a high
peaked cap like a Gaddi's, but not a sehral|II.
Within a month after the marriage the married pair pay a visit to the
wife's parents and make them a small present. This observance is
called har-phera 11.
Widow remarriage is recognised. Formerly the widow was obliged to
marry one of the deceased husband's brothers, but now this is not the
practice. She can choose her own husband within her own caste or
sub-division. This union is solemnized by an inferior form of marriage
called sargudhi***. There are no dhámú, and the bridegroom simply
goes to the woman's house with his putriár and brother. The bandhá is
given as at a regular wedding, but arti is not performed, and there is less
feasting and the cost is much less. The binding ceremony in this form
is when an ornament is put on her, usually a nose-ring..
reciter pece is repertoire Then the name a rupere
a feast is performed
* Dbámu, fr, dham a feast: dhamu = guest.
^ Badhái, fr. başhna, to increase.
IMáni, a measure.
$ Putriár, from putr, a son.
l Kumbh a new ghará full of water.
Bishk, fr. bishna = baithná, to sit down.
** Chingána, to scatter."
+ Suáj, dowry: fr. suá, red.
If Arti, to swing round anything from right to left.
$$ Ghundu.chádar, a bride's head-dress.
II|| Sehru, bridegroom's bead-dress.
Har.phera, fr, Bar, God, and pherna, to go; to visit in the name of God.
*** sargudhi, fr. sar, head (bair) and gudhna or gundhná, to plait.



212
Marriage in Churáh.
A quiet form of sargudhi marriage is called garib chára*. The lág,
etc., are all rendered as in the other form, but on an auspicious day the
bridegroom accompanied by his sister simply goes to the bride's house, and
at the entrance worships the kumbh. He then seats himself on the blanket
in the usual way, and the girl is seated next him by her mother, After
eating the couple take leave of the girl's father and proceed to the boy's
house where the kumbh is again touched. This second worship of the
kumbh makes the marriage binding.
Winds
The third and lowest form of marriage is the bandhá luánát in which a
widow, who is to marry her husband's brother, is married to him on the
kiriu day, i.e., 7th to the 11th or 13th day after the first husband's death.
She puts aside her late husband's ornaments and puts on his brother's, in
token that she accepts him. A he-goat is sacrificed at home to the de-
ceased husband and a small feast usually given. The widow's parents need
not attend, but they are entitled to a lág, called bakra, as being the price
of a goat. If the widow wishes to marry a stranger, he must pay the
bakrá of one rupee, and Re. 1.8 or Rs. 3 as chadyálıf.to her parents. An
auspicious day after the kiria karm period is ascertained from a jotahi,
and the ornaments changed as described above.
Lastly a man who elopes with a girl can, after a certain interval, open
negotiations with ber father, and if he assents, pay him Rs. 7 and a goat as
compensation. This observance is termed lág rít || and operates as a valid
marriage. I
The custom of gharjawantri or service in lieu of a money payment for
a wife, is common among all castes in the State, especially in the Churáh
and Sadr wizúrats. The term of service is usually three or seven years,
and the marriage may take place at any time if thegirl's father is agreeable.
A husband may divorce his wife if he cannot get on with her. The
divorce is complete if the husband receives back his ornaments and says:
" I have divorced you, Rájá ké durohí **," i.e., on the Rájá's oath. The
husband also breaks a stick in her presence. Divorced wives can
remarry if they like.
In succession all sons, even bastards, if recognized by the father,
succeed on equal terms, but the eldest son gets the best field as his
zethwágh; the second son gets a special implement, sickle, sword or axe
as his hathiár, while the third gets the family house as his mulwáher.
The son (rand put) or daughter (rand dhiátt) of a widow born in
her husband's house has all the rights of her deceased husband's own
children. It is, however, essential that the widow should continue to live
in her husband's house and the child be begotten therein.
* The custom (chára) of the poor.'
+ Luáná = to put on as a dress.
I Chadyali, fr. chadná = chorna, to let go.
S Jotshi, an astrologer.
| Rút = custon.
| Marriage customs differ considerably in the eastern and western portions of Churáb, and
thë above description chiefly applies to the eastern half. In the westeru half the byáh
or full marriage rite, according to orthodox Hindu custom, is the rule, and the janai is
upcommon; but the other forms are as above.
** Durohí == oath.
tt Rand = widow, and dhis daughter.
taughter.



Tenures in Churáh.
213
All dead Hindus except children not yet tonsured are burnt. The
head is placed towards the north and the hands on the chest, the face
being turned skyward. The Hindu rites are, in essentials, observed, but
the place of the acháraj is taken by the Bhát.
For seven, nine or thirteen days mourning is observed, only one meal
ide day, called upás*, being eaten, and on the day on which mourning is to
cease, a suit of good woollen clothes (which are prepared beforehand in
anticipation of death and worn on festival days) is given to the priest
who presides over the obsequies. Sixteen balls of rice are prepared
and offered to the deceased's ancestors and finally removed and
thrown into the nearest stream. The relations of the deceased also
wash their clothes and a he-goat is killed. Then a feast is given to the
relations and the mourning ends. This feast is usually given by the
deceased's wife's parents. Ceremonies are performed and balls made
and offered after one, three and six months, a year and four years, to
the deceased. At the latter, i. e., at the end of the fourth year, called
chubarki, the ceremonial is done on a big scale.
The obsequies of any man who dies childless are done in the same way,
but if he brings any calamity on the household an effigy is made and
placed near a spring or on the roof of the house or in some good place
and worshipped by offering him a cap, bread, and an earthen pot of ghi
which are finally worn and eaten by the man who is supposed to have
been affected by him. The spirit of the person who dies a violent death
is appeased by taking an earthen pot full of boiled ghi, a pitcher full of
water, and a goat to the spot where he met his death, and the goat is
killed there and his head and the vessels rolled down the hill. This is done
on the paniyáru, i.e., on the kiria karm day. The people perform sarádh,
Ceremonies are also performed for the propitiation of ancestors in
general.t
The Churáhis are zamindárs and hold land on two forms of tenure.
Those who pay half its produce are called ghárát and those who pay a
fixed share of grain, etc., are called mudyári. The half share is alone
divided after deducting the seed for the next crop. Occupancy tenants
are not allowed any special privilege in the shape of remission of rent or
favourable rates. The Churáhis are primarily and essentially cultivators,
but many of them own flocks of sheep and goats with which, like the
Gaddis, they visit Pángi in summer and the low hills in winter.
The Churáhis worship the deities on the following days :-
Shiv-Sunday, Monday and Thursday.
Sakti–Sunday, Monday and Tuesday.
Nag or Mahal-Thursday and Saturday.
Kailų-Thursday.
Kyelang-Sunday and Thursday.
Sitla—Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday.
Chaund-Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday.
* Opás = fast.
Men who have died obildless are propitiated by putting garlands of flowers and a red
Woolled cap on their effigies on the Sankránt and Dáns days.
I Ty, ghar = half.
& Fr, muda, a fixed amount.



Churáhi festivals.
To Shiv are offered a chola or woollen coat, a sheep, charms of silver
oblong in shape worn round the neck, a nádi (a silver-arch ornament
shaped like a drum These offerings are taken by the head of the
family, and the ornaments are worn by him out of respect for Shiv and
to avert his wrath. To Sakti Devi are offered, as elsewhere, a goat,
trident and cakes. The offerings to a Nág are an iron mace (khanda),
a crooked iron stick (kundi), (these are left at the shrine), a sheep and
cakes (these are divided among the priest, chela and worshipper, and
eaten). To Kailu are offered a red cap, an iron mace and a kid. The
cap and part of the kid go to the priest, the rest to the worshipper.
Kyelang's offerings are a mace, a goat and a red cap. Sitla's offerings
are a goat and cakes like the Devi's. Chaund gets cakes, and occasion.
ally a goat is also sacrificed at her shrine.
Churáhis make a pilgrimage to Manmahesh in Bhadon or in Asuj, on
the Drub Ashtami day.
Blocks of wood or stone which are supposed to possess- some super-
natural attributes are worshipped. When a deity is to be set up for the first
time and consecrated, a Brahman's presence is necessary. The priests
preside at shrines; and in dwellings the elder members of the household.
Priests are not selected from the Brahınan class only, but from all the
other castes except low castes. Brahmans, Rájputs, Ráthis and Thakkars
are eligible to hold the position of a priest.
The following are some of the festivals observed in Churáh :-
1. Biswa, on 1st Baisakh, at which pindri or balls of grain are eaten
with honey and ghi or gur. People also collect together for singing and
dancing, this being the Hindu New Year's Day.
2. Patroru ki sankrant* on 1st Bhádon, held in memory of their
ancestors. Flour is mixed with water, salt and spices and spread on
bhují leaves, called patroru, and eaten.
3. Másru, held on the same day as the Drub Ashtami at Manimahesh
in honour of Shivam that is, on the eighth day of the light half of
Bhádon. It is aocompanied by dancing.
4. Several of the ordinary melas observed in the capital, such as
Holí, Diwali, Lohri, etc., are also held in Churáh,
5. Chhinj, or wrestling matches, associated with the Lakhdáta cult,
are held annually in every pargana of Churáh.
CHURERA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
CHÚBÍGAR: (1) a maker of bracelets, called in the west Bangera or Wangri-
gar. Also called sometimes Kachera or glass-worker, the Chúrígar
generally makes bracelets of glass or lac, which are sold in the east by
the Maniár, and in the west by the Bangera. The Chúrígar also makes
bracelets of bell-metal or any other material except silver or gold.
The term is probably merely an occupational one, and in the east of the
Punjab practically synonymous with Maniár. (2) A Ját clan (agricul-
tural) found in Multán.
Sankránt
örst day of the month.



216
DABB, DAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán and Shahpur,
DABERAH, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DABGAR, a low caste who make kuppis for oil and ghi. They prepare
the raw hides themselves. The term is, at least in these Provinces, a
purely occupational one, but the dabgars are principally recruited
from the Chamár caste, and, in Sialkot, from the Khojás and Chuhrás
also. By metathesis the term becomes badgar.
DABKAYA, DAHAYá, cf. Katayá, a gilder, a beater of wire.
DACHCHI, a clan of the Bhattis of the Sándal Bár, who are said to marry
with the Chaddrars, but not with the Bhagsiri or Jandrákes, though the
latter also are both Bhațți clads.
DADD, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
DADDUKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Dádí, a sept of Rajputs, descended from Chhatar Chand, 3rd son of Párá
Chand, 31st Rájá of Kahlúr or Bilaspur State.
Dádi, see under Dáwai.
DADPOTRA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán (doubtloss Daúd-
potra, q. v.).
DADRA BHAtrí, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Dádú, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DÁDÚPANTHÍ.-Founded by Dádú,* a Gaur Brahman, who died in 1703. The
Dádúpanthi sect is usually divided into three orders :-
(i) Nágas,t found in the villages about Jaipur : 'they wear the
chotí or scalp-lock, and ornaments, and are wrestlers, fencers,
and on occasion warriors ;
(ii) the Viraktas, † who wear ochre-coloured garments and do not
live in houses;
* Dádú was born at Ahmadá bád in Guzerát, whence be migrated to Naráina. 50
miles south-west of Jaipur and now the head-quarters of the sect. At the gurudevara
here the Dádúpanthís assemble in Phágan and thence go to Sámbhar where a fairia
held on the anniversary of Dádú's death. Regarding his birth, tradition avers that an aced
Brahman had 110 800, but one day God, in the guise of an old man, told him in response to
his prayers, that he would find floating on the river a box containing a male child. .gmoking
its toe. He did so, and his wife's breasts miraculously filled with milk, so that the
was able to suckle the child. When the boy was 10 years old, the aged man again appear.
ed to the boy and gave him some betel from his own mouth, whereby all secrets were
revealed to him, and the old nan then named him Dádú Jív, bidding him remain
celibate and found an order of his own. Dádú then exclaimed ; Dádů gaib mahin ang
dev milá, páyá ham parshád, Mastak meri kar dharyá dekhá agam agád." By chance i
found a gurú ; he gave me parshád and laid his hands upon my head, whereby all secreta
were revealed to me." Dadu's death is assigned to Sbt. 1760 (1703 A.D.): but he
is also said to have been 6th in descent from Rámáband. If so be flourished in 1600
A. D. Other accounts make him contemporary with Dára Shikoh, others with Govind
Singh. According to Macauliffe, Sikh Religion, VI, p. 140, the Dádúpanthís place Dediisi
death at the same time and place as Kabír's.
ť Nága is said to be derived from Sanskrit náguaka, naked, but there is the usual play
on the words nanga (naked) and nág, spake. The Nágás are mercenary soldiers in
Jaipur and other States of Rajputana but are not known in the Punjab. See below
alao.
I Virakta simply means ascetic. Mr. Maclagan says the celibates of to.day wear
white, shave the beurd and moustache, and wear necklaces, with wbite roand cang to
which is attached a piece of cloth which hangs down the back-clearly the kapálí,



216
The Dádupanthis.
(iii) the Uttrád has, who shave the head with the beard and mons-
tache,* wear white clothes, and generally practise as physi.
cians; besides
(iv) the secular Dádúpanthis, who are called Bistardhárís.
Dádú is said to have had 52 disciples who established as many deras
or resting places. The head of each dera, the deradár, presents
contributions to the gaddi-nashin or incumbent of the gurú.dwara at
Naráiná, who is elected by a conclave of the deradárs. The sect is
recruited from the Brahman, Kshatriya, Rajput, Ját and Gújar castes,
but never from those of menial rank. As a rule children are initiated.
Dadú composed a book called the Dádú Bání, of 5,000 verges, some of
which are recited by his followers, after their ablutions every morning.
In the evening ártí is performed to it by lighting lamps and reciting
passages from it. Dádú forbade idolatry, built no temples, ll and
taught the unity of God. In salutation his votaries use the word Sat
Rám, the “ True God." But, in spite of Dádú's denunciation of idolatry,
his hair, his tumbá (cup), cholá (gown) aod kharoun (sandals) are
religiously preserved in his cave (guphá) at Sambbar.
Before a gurú admits a disciple the privations and difficulties of jog
are impressed upon him, and he is warned that he will have to
remain celibate, live on alms, abstain from Aesh and stimulants, and
uphold the character of bis order. In the presence of all the sádhus
the gurú shaves off the disciple's chotí (scalp-lock) and covers his head
with the kapáli (skull-cap), which Dádú wore. He is also given &
kurta of bhagwá (ochre) colour, aná taught the guri-mantra which 'he
must not reveal. The rite concludes with the distribution of sweets.
On a gurú's death the usual Hindu rites are observed, and on the
17th day a feast is given to the sádhús. A fine tomb is sometimes
erected outside the dera, in memory of the deceased, if he was wealthy. :
Although the Dádúpanthis proper are celibate, both men and women
are admitted into the community, and a great many have taken to
marriage without ceasing to be Dádúpanthis. These form the bistar-
dhárá or secnlar group, which should probably be regarded as &
separate caste. Many of them are merchants, especially in grain, and
wealthy,
the gu the character of halms, abstain frearned that he
* The Uttradhi have a gurú at Rathia in Hissár. See below.
+ Of these 52 disciples, Raijab, Gharib Dás and Sundar Dás. were the chief. Raijab
Wag'a Mubammadan; it is said that Muhammadans who follow Dádú are called Uttradhi in
contradistinction to the Hindu Dádúpanthís who are called Nágí. But the Nági is
olearly the Nága already described, and Uttrádbi oan only mean“ northern."
The second, Gharib Dás, composed many hymns, still popular among Hindus, but his
followers are said to be mostly Chamárs, who cut tbe hair short and wear cotton quilting.
Bundar Dás composed the Sakya, a work resembling the Sikh Granthan
I But see the foregoing foot-gote. The followers; of Gbarib Dás, at any rato, clude
Obamars, and Mr. Maclagan adds that many adherents of the seat are found among the
lower casten.
$ According to Wilson the worship is addressed to Ráma, the deity negatively described
In the Vedanta theology.
! Now temples are built by his followers who say that they worship" the book" in them.
| Mr. Maclagan adds: “In fapt, the doctrine of Dádu is sometimes described as
pantheistic. It je contained in Beveral works in the Bhasha topgpe whicb are said to
include, many of the sayings of Kabir. Accounts of tbe nuru and bia followers are given
in the Jamm-lila."



Dadwab. Dági.
217
Dadwál. --The Rajput clan to which belongs the ancient ruling family of
Dabárpar, but said to take its name from Dáda in Kangra on the
Hoshiarpur border. The Ránás of Bít Mánaswal, or tableland of the
Hoshiárpur. Siwáliks were Dadwal Rájputs, and the clan still holds
the tract.
The Dad wáls are found in the neighbourhood of Datárpor, the seat
of their former sovereignty, and on the south-west face of the Siwáliks
in Hoshiarpur tahsil near Dholbáha and Janauri or Jánkapuri, its
ancient name, which is still used. Jának was an ancient Súrajbansi
ruler. The Dadwals are a branch of the Katoch and do not intermarry
with them, or with thu Goleriás or Sibáyas on the ground of a common
descent. They have an interesting local history which describes how
they wrested the tract round Datarpur from a Cháhng ráni.
The Dad wáls have several als or families, whose names are derived
from their settlements, such as Janaurach, Dholbáhía, Datarpuría,
Fatehpuría, Bhámnowalía, Khangwárach, Narúria, Rámpuría, etc.
Datarpur is their chief village, but they have no system of chhats
and makáns. (For their history and the septs which intermarry with
them see the Hoshiarpur Gazetteer, 1904, pp. 48-9.)
DAFRÁNÁ, an agricultural clan found in Shóhpur.
DáGAR, a Ját tribe, numerous in Delhi and Gurgaon, and with a small
colony in Rohtak.
Diaí, Dáqní, (from dágh,* a blemish; the word dághí is a term of abuse
in Kullú), & generic term for an impure caste in Kullú. Koli is
hardly a synonym, though, according to Ibbetson, these two words,
together with a third, Chanál, are used almost indifferently to describe
the lower class of menials of the highest hills. The Koli of the
plains is easily distinguishable, by his locality, from the Koli of the
hills. The former probably nothing more than a Chamár tribe
immigrant from Hindústán ; the latter, of Kolian origin. The two
would appear to meet in the Síwáliks. Cunningham believed that
the bills of the Punjab were once occupied by a true Kolian race
belonging to the same group as the Kols of Central India and Behar,
and that the present Kolis are very probably their representatives.
He points out that dá, the Kolian for water, is still used for many
of the smaller streams of the Simla hills, and that there is a line of
tribes of Kolian origin extending from Jabbalpur at least a far as
Alláhábád, all of which use many identical words in their vocabularies
and have a common tradition of an hereditary connection with work.
ing in iron. The name of Kullú, however, he identifies with Kulinda,
* But according to the late Mr. A. Anderson :-" The popular explanation of the word
Dagí is that it is derived from dág Cattle, because they dray away the carcasses of dead
cattle and also eat the flesh. If a man says he is a Koli, then a Kanet turn, round in
him and asks him whether he does not drag carcasses ; , and on his saying he doce, che
Kanet alleges he is a Dágí, and the would be Koli Cinsents. There are very few in
Kullú proper that abstain from touching the dead. There are more in Saráj but they
admit they are called either Dágis or Kolis, and that whether they abstain from touching
carcasses or not, all eat, drink and intermarry on equal terms. It is a mere piéce of
affectation for a man who does not touch the dead to say he will not intermarry with
the family of a man who is not so fastidious. This is a social distinction, and probably
also indicates more or less the wealth of the individual who will not touch the dead."



218
Dagis.
and thinks that it has nothing in common with Kol. Kola, the
ordinary name for any inhabitant of Kullá, is a distinct word
from Koli and with a distinct meaning.
The names Koli, Dági, and Chanál seem to be used to denote almost
all the low castes in the hills. In the median ranges, such as those
of Kángra proper, the Koli and Chanál are of higher status than
the Dági, and not very much lower than the Kanet and Ghirth
or lowest cultivating castes ; and perbaps the Koli may be said to
occupy a somewhat superior position to, and the Chanál very much
the same position as, the Chamár in the plains, while the Dági
eorresponds more nearly with the Chúbra. In Kullú the three words
seem to be used almost indifferently, and to include not only the
lowest castes, but also members of those castes who have adopted
the pursuits of respectable artisans. The interesting quotations from
Sir James Lyall give full details on the subject. Even in Kángra
the distinction appears doubtful. Sir James Lyall quotes a tradition
which assigns a common origin, from the marriage of a demi-god
to the daughter of a Kullú demon, to the Kanets and Dágís of
Bullú, the latter having become separate owing to their ancestor
who married a Tibetan woman, having taken to eating the flesh
of the yak, which, as a sort of ox, is sacred to Hindus ; and
he thinks that the story may point to a mixed Mughal and Hindu
descent for both castes. Again he writes : « The Koli class is
« pretty numerous in Rájgiri on the north-east side of pargana
“ Hamirpur; like the Kanet it belongs to the country to the east of
• Kángra proper. I believe this class is treated as outcast by other
“ Hindus in Rajgiri, though not so in Bilaspur and other countries
“ to the east. The class has several times attempted to get the Katoch
« Rájá to remove the ban, but the negotiations have fallen through
s because the bribe offered was not sufficient. Among outcasts the
“Chamárs are, as usual, the most numerous.” Of pargana Kángra he
writes : “ The Dágís have been entered as secoud-class Gaddis, but
" they properly belong to a different nationality, and bear the same
" relation to the Kanets of Bangáhal that the Sepis, Bádis, and Hális
" (also classed as second-class Gaddis) do to the first-class Gaddis."
So that it would appear that Dágís are more common in Kángra
proper, and Kolis to the east of the valley ; and that the latter are
outcast while the former clain kinship with the Kanet. (Kángra
Settlement Report, § 67, pp. 65 and 62; 113 shows that in Kullú at
least the Dágí is not a caste). Háli is the name given in Chamba
to Dágí or Chranál; and the Hális are a low caste, much above
the Dumna and perhaps a little above the Chamár, who do all sorts
of menial work and are very largely employed in the fields. They
will not intermarry with the Chamár. See also Koli.
The late Mr. A. Anderson, however, wrote as to the identity of Dági
and Chanál :-"In Kullú proper there are no Chanáls, that is, there are
none who on being asked to what caste they belong will answer that
they are Chanáls; but they will describe themselves as Dági-Chanáls
or Koli-Chanáls, and men of the same families as these Dági-Chanáls
or Koli-Chanáls will as often merely describe themselves as Dágís or
Kolis. In Kullú Dági, Koli, and Chanál mean very nearly the same
thing, but the word Koli is more common in Saraj and Chanál is



Dahám-Dahba.
219
scarcely used at all in Kullú; but Chanáls are, I believe, numerous
in Mandi, and in the Kángra valley. A Dági who had been out of
the Kullú valley, told me he would call himself a Dági in Kullú, a
Chanál in Kángra, and a Koli in Plách or Saraj, otherwise these local
castes would not admit him or eat with him. Again and again
the same man has called himself a Dági and also a Koli. If a Kanet
wishes to be respectful to one of this low caste he will call him a Koli,
if angry with him a Dági. A Chanál of Mandi State will not
intermarry with a Kullú Dági. In some places as in Manali kothi,
Kanets smoke with Dágis, but this is not common in Kullú, though
the exclusiveness has arisen only within the last few years, as caste
distinctions became gradually more defined .... A Chamár in Saraj will
call himself a Dági, and men calling themselves Kolis said they would
eat and drink with him. They said he was a Chamár merely because
he made shoes, or worked in leather. Most Dágis in Kullú proper
will not eat with Chamárs, but in some places they will. It depends
on what has been the custom of the families.”
Daná, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Multán, Kabírwalá tahsil,
Dahá (Dáhá), also. a Ját sept, found in Dera Ghází Khán. Like the
Parhár(s) Játs, and their Mírásís the Mongla and Sidhar, they are
said to eschew the use of black clothes or green bangles.
DAHAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAHALO, DAHálo, two Ját clans (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAHAMRÁI, DAHAMRÁYÁ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DABAN, one of the principal clans of the Játs in Karnál : head-quarters at
Shahrmalpur.
DAHÁN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAHANG, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAHAR, a Ját tribe, akin to the Langáh, found in Multán (agricultural).
PÁHAR, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur,
Dánar, a Ját clan (agricultural) 'found in Multán. In Baháwalpur they
hold an important position. Their descent is traced from RájRawan,
ruler of Mirpur Mathila, near Ghot-ki, who was converted to Islám by
Sayyid Jalal and was by him named Amír-ud-Dáhr, or “ Ruler of the
Age.” Once rulers of part of Sindh, the Dáhr power decreased in the
time of the Langáh supremacy, and in Akbar's time they were address-
ed merely as Zamíndars, but the Náhars conceded many privileges
to them and these were maintained by the Dáúdpotrás on their rise to
power. The Dáhrs are closely connected with the Gilani-Makhdúms
of Uch, to whom they have, it is said, given eighteen daughters in
marriage from time to time. (For further details see the Bahawalpur
Gazetteer.)
DAHÁR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAHáwá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAHBA, a Muhammadan Ját tribe found in Gujrát. It claims Janjúa Rajput
origin and descent from one Kboga, & servant of Akbar who gave him
& robe of honour and a gray (dâhb) horse-whence its name.



820
Dahimb Dahiya.
Danína, group of Brahmans, found in Hissár.
DAHIYA-(1) A Ját tribe found on the north-eastern border of the Sámpla
and the adjoining portion of the Sonepat tahsils of Rohtak and Delbi.
They claim to be descended from Dahla, the only son of a Chauhan
Rajput named Mánik Rar, by a Dhankar Ját woman. This is probably
the Mánik Rai Chaubán who founded Hánsi. Another account makes
their ancestor Dhadhíj, son of Haria Harpal, son of Prithi Rája.*
Another tradition derives the name Dahiyá from Dadhrérá, a village
in Hissár, which it thus makes the starting place (nikás) of the tribe.
The Dahiyá is one of the 36 royal tribes of Rajputs, whose original
home was about the confluence of the Sutlej with the Indus. They
are possibly, the Dahiæ of Alexander.
(2) A faction, opposed to the Ahúlána, said to be named after the
Dahiyá Játs. These two factions are found in Kurnál, as well as in Delhi
and R htak. The Ahúlána faction is headed by the Ghatwal or Malak
Jats, whose head-quarters are Dher-ka-Ahúlána in Guhána, and who
were, owing to their successful opposition to the Rájputs, the accepted
heads of the Játs in these parts. Some one of the emperors called
thein in to assist 'him in coercing the Mandahár Rájputs, and thus the
old enmity was strengthened. The Dahiyá Játs, growing powerful,
became jealous of the supremacy of the Gbatwals and joined the
Mandahárs against them. Thus the country side was divided into two
factions; the Gujars and Tagas of the tract, the Jáglán Játs of thapa
Naultha, and the Latmár Játs of Rohtak joining the Dahiyás, and the
Húda Jáțs of Rohtak, and most of the Játs of the tract except the
Jágláns, joining the Ahúlávas. In the Mutiny, disturbances took place
in the Rohtak District between these two factions, and the Mandahárs
of the Nardak ravaged the Ahúlánas in the south of the tract. The
Dahiyá is also called the Ját, and occasionally the Maudahár faction.
The Játs and Rájputs seem, independently of these divisions, to
consider each other, tribally speaking, as natural enemies. This
division runs right through Sonepat and more faintly through Delhi
tahsil, and is so firmly rooted in the popular mind that Muhammadans
even class themselves with one or the other party. Thus the Muham-
madan Gújars of Pánchi Gájrán call themselves Dahiyás and so do
all the neighbouring villages.
* In Delhi the legend is that Hariá Harpál, being defeated in battle by the king of Delhi
took refuge in a lonely forest which from the number of its trees he called Ban auta--now
corrupted into Barautá-in Rohtak. There he ruled and his son Dhadhij after him. Dhadhij
one day in hunting chanced upon a certain pond or tank near Pogihalá in the same district
where the Ját women had come together to get their drinking water. Just then a man
came out of the village leading a buffalo-calf with a rope to the pond to give it water. The
animal either from fright or frolic bounded away from the hand of its owner, and he gave
chase but in vain. Neighbours joined in the pursuit, which was nevertheless unsuccessful.
till the animal in its headlong flight came across the path of a Játní going along with (wo
gharras of water on her head. She quietly put out her foot on the rope which was trailing
along the ground and stood firm under the strain which the impetus of the fugitive gave.
The calf was caught, and Dhadhíj looking on with admiration, became enamoured of the
stalwart comeliness of its captor. Such a wife. he said, must needs wear a strong race of
sons to her husband, and that husband, notwithstanding the fact of her already being
married he forthwith determined to be himself. By & mixture of cajolery, threats and
gift-making he obtained his desire-and the Játní married the Kshatri prince. By her
he had three sons-Tejá, Sahjá, and Juisa. Dhadhij gave his name to the Dabiyás, and
his children spread over the neighbouring tracts, dividing the country between them
Teja's descendants live in Rohtak ; Sahjá's partly in Rohtak and partly in 12 villages
of Delhi ; while Jaisá's descendants live in Rohtak and in 16 villages in Delhi,



Dahlo. Dalo.
221
The Ahulana tradition traces their origin to Rajputaná. Their
ancestor was coming Delhi-wards with his brothers, Mom and Som, in
search of a livelihood. They quarrelled on the road and had a deadly
fight on the banks of the Ghátá naddí. Mom and Sóm, who were on
one side, killed their kinsman and came over to Delhi to the king there
who received them with favour and gave them lands: to Sóm the tract
across the Ganges where his descendants now live as Rajputs. Mom was
sent to Rohtak, and he is now represented by the Játs there as well
as in Hánsi and Jind. The Rohtak party bad their head-quarters at
Ahúlána in that district, and thence on account of internal quarrels
they spread themselves in different directions, some coming into the
Delbi district.
Danko, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAALULÍ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Dano, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAHOKA, a Kharral clan (agriculto ral) found in Montgomery.
DAHON, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
DAHONDA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAHRÁLA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DABRÍJA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Maltán.
Dáír, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
DAK, Dakaut, DAKOTRA : see under Brabman.
DÁL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DALÁL, a Ját tribe found in Rohtak. It claims Ráthor Rájput origin, and its
traditions say that, 28 generations ago, one Dhanna' Rao settled at
Silauthi, and married a Badgújar Ját woman of Sankhaul near
Bahadurgarh, by whom he had fonr sons-Dille, Desal, Mán and
Sahiya.* From these sprang the four clans of Dalál, Deswál, Mán and
Sewagt Játs, who do not intermarry one with another. The Daláls are
hereditary enemies of the Dahiyá Játs.
Dalání, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DALEL, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DALEO, a small Ját clan, found in Ludhiana. They say that Jagdeo had five
sons : Daleo, Dewal, Ulak (Aulak), Malanghf and Pamár. Now Rájá
Jail Pangal promised a Bháțoi, Kangalí by name, 10 times as much
largesseas Jagdeo gave her. But Jagdeo cut off his head. The
Bhátni, however, stuck it on again, Still, ever since this clan has had
small necks !
DALLÁWÁLIÁ, the eighth of the Sikh misls or confederacies, which was
recruited from Játs.
Dalo, Dalo, two (?) Ját clans (agricultural) found in Multán.
Játs, who these sprang had font som woman of a Rao seriad its
10 timer Nonel live
ain, stiligdeo com
* Or Dalla, Desu, Mán and sowa were the sons of Khokhar, a Chauhán Rajput who
married a Ját wife, according to the Jind account,
Or Sawal'in Jind.
1 ? Bailang



222
Damai~Darúgar.
I to spealslam, the name a term applikohistán
Damai, a Gurkhá clan in the Simla Hill States, who do tailor's work, and
are thought a very low caste.
DAMMAR, (m.) a tribe of Játs, originally called Láſ, immigrants from Sind.
They affect the Sindhi title of Jám and claim to be superior to other
Játs in that they do not marry daughters outside the tribe ; but the
rule is often broken.
DAŅDAN, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DANDI, (i) a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán, (ii) also a Sangási
sub-order.
Dandial, an agricultural clan found in Sbáhpur.
DANDIWÁL, a Ját clan, claiming Chaubán descent, which emigrated from
Delhi via Jaisalmír to Sirsa : found in Hissár, and also in Jind State.
In the latter it affects the jathera and jandíán worship, and has as its
sidh a Pír whose shrine is at Beluwálá, in British Territory. At the
birth of a son, they offer to his samadh a piece of gur, a rupee and
some cloth which are taken by a Brahman.
DáŅGARAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAŅGABIK, lit. 'cow-people': (i) & small tribe, confined to four villages in
Chitral and said to speak a language cognate with Shina. Though
long since converted to Islám, the name Dangarík would seem to show
that they were Hindus originally; (ii) a term applied to all the Shina-
speaking people of Chitral and the Indus Kohistán generally,
because of the peculiar aversion of the Suns, which is only shared
by the Dangaríks and Kálásh Káfirs, for the cow and domestic fowls.--
Biddulph's Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh, pp. 64 and 113.
DAŅge, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Danna--see Wargara.
DÁŅWAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Dáolí, a hill caste of Dámná status who work for gold in streams in the low
hills (e.g., about Úná); in the high hills (e.g., Kángļa) called Sansoi,
and corresponding to the Khírs who are the goldworkers of the plains.
Cf. dáula, dáula, a washer for gold.
DARAD, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DARAIN, DREN, see Malláh.
DARD, a term applied by the Main to the tribes of the Indus Kohistán who
live on the left bank of that river: Biddulph's Tribes of the Hindoo
. Koosh, p. 12.
DÁRGARE, wooden bowl makers, see Chitráli.
Dargo, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DAROL, DAROLÍ, a sept of Rájputs descended from Mián Kela, a son of
Sangar Chand, 16th Rájá of Kahlír.
IVARTOCHE, carpenters, in the valley below Chitral, and in the Gilgit and
Indos valleys : see Chitráli.
DARÚGAR, a maker of gunpowder. This term and its synonyms include
various custes; always Mubammadans,
ar,



Darvesh-Dátye.
228
DARVESH.--Darvesh means one who begs from door to door (dar "door').
But the Darvesh of our Census returns are a peculiar class found mainly
in Batála and Pathankot and in Amritsar and Kapurthala. They culti.
vate a little land, play musical instruments, beg, make ropes, go to a
house where there has been a death and chant the praises of the
deceased, hang about mosques, and so forth. They are hardly ascetics,
yet the small number of women seem to show that they have not yet
formed into a separate caste, and are still recruited from outside.
Elsewhere, e. g. in Gujrát, they are poor scholars who seek instruction in
mosques and live on alms or by begging from door to door, resembling
the talib-ul-ilm of the frontier. Sometimes they are employed as bangis
at mosques, or in other minor posts.
Darvesh Kael.--The Utmánzai and Ahmadzai clans (descendants of Músá
Darvesh) of the Wazír Patháns (q. v.).
DARZI.—Hindi syn. sújí, a purely occupational term, there being no Darzi
caste in the proper acceptation of the word, though there is a Darzi
guild in every town. The greater number of Darzís belong perhaps
to the Dhobi and Chhímba castes, more especially to the latter ; but
men of all castes follow the trade, which is that of a tailor or sempster.
The Darzis are generally returned as Hindu in the east and Musalmán
in the west.
Dás(6)-(a) Sanskrit dásá, a mariner ; according to the Purán, begotten by
a Súdrá on a Kshatriya. The Sástrá and Tántrá give a different origin
(Colebrooke's Essays, p. 274) ; (b) Dás, the appellation common to Súdrás.
of. Karan.
Dasa, fr. das, 'ten,' as opposed to Bísa, fr. bis, 'twenty': half-caste, as
opposed to cne of pure descent-see under Bánia. In Gurgaon the
term is applied to a group, which is practically a distinct caste, of
Tagas who have adopted the custom of widow remarriage, and so lost
status, though they are of pure Taga blood: Punjab Customary Law,
II, p. 132.
Dashál, fr. Dashwál, of the plains,' is a group of Rajputs found in
tho Simla Hills. To it belong the chiefs of Ghúnd, Theog, Madhán
and Darkoți, four, baronies feudatory to Keonthal State. It is
asserted that the Dasháls once ranked as Kanets, wearing no gacred
thread and performing no orthodox funeral rites; and a fifth Dasha
sept is still only of Kanet status. This latter sept gives its name to
Dashaulí, a village in Púnar pargana of Keonghal.
DASHTI, once a servile tribe of the BALOCH, now found scattered in
small numbers through Deras Gházi and Ismail Khan and Muzaffargarh.
Possibly, as Dames suggests, from one of the pumerous dashts or table-
lands, found throughout the country.
DASPÁL, ą Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
DASTI, DASHTI (from dasht, wilderness ').-A Baloch tribe of impure de-
scent. See under Baloch.
DA-TONG-KAR-PO, DAONGR-KÁRÍ : See Chahzang.
DÁTYE, & Labána clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Darkotí, four Dasháls once
funeral rites i



224
This Dáúdpotras.
DIGDPOTRA.The sept to which belongs the ruling family of Baháwalpur.
'It claims to be Abbássi* and is practically confined to Bahawalpur and
the neighbouring portions of Multán, part of which was once included
in that State.
The Dáúdpotra septs trace their descent from Muhammad Khan II,
Abbasi, 10th in descent from Dáúc Khán I. Muhammad Khan II had
three sons :-
(1) Firoz or Pirúị Khán, (2) Arib (or Arab) Khán, ancestor of the
Arbani sept, and (3) I'sab Kháp, ancestor of the Isbáni or Hisbáni sept.
The descendants of Pirúj Khán are known as Pirjánis, Fírozánis or
Pir Pirjánis and to this sept belongs the family of the Nawabs of
Bahawalpur. A sub-sept of the Pirjánis is called Shamáni, from Sháb
Muhammad Khán.
The Arbánis have five sub-septs : Músáni, Ruknáni or Rukráni,
Rahmáni, Jambráni and Bhinbráni, all descended from eponyms (Músá
Khán, etc.). The Músáni have an offshoot called Kandani. The
Isbánis have no sub-septs.
A large number of sub-septs also claim to be Dáúdpotra though they
are not descended from Muhammad Khan II. Thus the Achránis claim
descent from Achar, a son of Kehr. Kehr was brother to the wife of
Channi Khán, father of Dáád Khán I, and founded the Kehráni sept,
which has seven main branches :
Aobráni.
Haláni.
Bakhshani.
Jamani.
Mundhani. These five are knownt collectively ao Panj-páre.
Marúfáni.
Tayyibáni. )
A number of other septs also claim to be Dáúdpotra, but their claims
are often obscure, disputed or clearly uptenable. Such are the Noháni,
Zoraia, Karáni (who claim to be Kehránis), Ronjha or Ranúhja (a sept
of the Sammas), and Chandráni (who intermarry with the Arbánis and
therefore are presumed to be Arbánis). The Wisrápi, 1 Mulani,
Thúmra, Widáni, Kálra, Jhúnri, Bhanbháni, Hakrá apd Kat-bálll are
spurious Dáúdpotras.
* For the origin of this titlo see the Baháwalpur Gazetteer,
4-páre, is said to mean ..fold,' but cf. the Panj-páre among the Patháns, also the
Panj-pao of Multán.
+ The Arbáni and Isbáni Daúdpotras do not recognise the Wisránis. The former declare
that four families of the Abra (q. v.) tribe migrated from Wísarwah in Sindh in the time
of Nawab Muhammad Baháwal Khán II. The Abras gave one daughter in marriage
to Baláwal Khán, Pirjáni, a second to an Arbáni family, and a third to an Isbáni.
and asked their sons-in-law to admit them among the Dáúdpotras, so that they might
be entitled to all the privileges which the Dáúdpotras enjoyed. This was granted and they
were called Wisráni Dáúdpotras (from Wisharwah).
*8 The story goes that once Muhammad Baháwal Khán III happened to see ono Núra
Kharola with his head shaved. A shaven head being generally looked down upon, the
Nawéb remarked in Sindhi (which he always spoke), ho disso thora, 'look at that bald
head and so they were nick-named Thumra. They are really Kharolas (converted sweepers)
by caste.
Originally Játs of low statis (there is still a sept of Mohánas which is known by
this name). They givo their daughters in marriage to any tribe while the Dáúdpotras
are particularly strict in forming alliances.



Dáúdzai~Dáwari.
225
For a full account of the Dáúdpotra septs, whose modern develop-
ments illustrate the formation of a tribe by descent, affiliation and
fiction, reference must be made to the Baháwalpur. Gazetteer.
DÁÚDZAI.- The Pathán tribe which occupies the left bank of the Kábul river as
far down as its junction with the Bára. Like the Mohmand, the Dáúdzai
are descended from Daulatyár, son of Ghorai, the progenitor of the
Ghoria Khel. Dáúd had three sons, Mandkai, Mámúr, and Yusuf,
from whom are descended the main sections of the tribe. Mandkai
had three sons. Husain, Nekai, and Bálo, of whom only the first is
represented in Pesháwar. Nekai fled into Hindústán, while Bálo's few
descendants live in parts of Tíráh. Kalíd-i-Afghání, pp. 167, 168, 179,
182. A, N., p. i., iii.
Daúl, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Daula, an Aráin olan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
DAULAT Khel. One of the four great tribes of the Loháni Patháng* which
about the beginning of the 17th century drove the Marwats and Mián
Khel out of Tánk. Their principal clan was the Katti Khel; and under
their chief, Katál Khán, the Daulat Khel ruled Tánk in Dera Ismail
Kbán, and were numerous and powerful about the middle of the 18th
century. They accompanied the Durráni into Hindústán, and brought
back much wealth. But since that time the Bhițanni and other tribes
have encroached, and they are now small and feeble. The Nawab of.
Tánk, the principal jágírdár of the District, is a Katti Khel. Raverty
described them as íláts or nomads dwelling to the north of the Sulaiman
Range from Daraban town on the east to the borders of Gbazni on the
west, along the banks of the Gomal, each clan under the nominal rale
of its own malik. Though their principal wealth consisted in flocks
and herds they were engaged in trade, importing horses from Persia
and majítha into Hindustán, and taking back, with them piece-goods
and other merchandise for sale in Kábul and Kandabár. They used to
pay ushr or tithe to the dynasty at Kabul, but were not liable to
furoish troops.
DAULEKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
DAUKA, a messenger : cf. Baláhar.
DAURI, see Dáwari.
DAUTANNJ, DOTANNI, a Patháo clan, numbering some 700 fighting men, which
inhabits the Wáno valley and the country between the Wazírí hills
and the Gúmal. Their lands are comparatively fertile, growing rice
and cereals. They are on good terms with the Wazírs, and are well-
to-do, carrying on a profitable trade with Bokhára. They bring down
postins, chakmas, and charras. They have three kirris in British
territory, near Katmalána and in the Káhirı ilága. About a third of
them are káfila folk and have no kirris. They own about 3,500 cannels,
They leave their flocks behind in the hills. They come and go along
with the Mián Khels, though forming separate caravans.
DÁWARI.-Living on the fertile alluvium of the Tochi valley in Nor-
thern Waziristán, the Dáwaris or Dauris have no necessity to culti-
* Really only a clan of the Mámú Khel, the Daulat Khel practically absorbed that tribe
and gave its own name to it,
Boite
ahat tribe



226
Dawari septs.
pate very strenuously or to migrate. Hence they are lacking in
military spirit,* unenterprising and home-staying, and a Dáwari, even
when outlawed, will not remain away from the valley for more than
a couple of years.
Their descent is thus given :-
DAWAR, EPONYM.
Tappizai.
Mallizai.
N
.
Boya-
Mosakki-
Hassu Khel-
Urmuz-
Zerrakki-
Isori-
Tappia
Arghunda
Dalat Khel-
Haidar Khel and Ippi
Mírán Shah-
Khaddi-
Hakim Khel-
Mubarak Sháhi-
Darpa Kbel.
án. Thithe Dihgansayyid house
11
box, and as "La of a foundling "he origin of the Maquite a distinct saim
There are also two disconnected sections, Malakh and Amzoni. The
Idak sub-section also does not claim descent from either of the main
branches. The Malakh are a mixed division, including the Muhammad
Khel, Idak Khel, Pai Khel, Dihgans, Land Boya and Ghazlamai.
The latter sept includes three or four Sayyid houses which claim
descent from Dangar Sáhib. The Dihgans are quite a distinct sept,
coming from Afghánistán. The origin of the Malakh is the common
Afghán story of a foundling. Some Durránis abandoned a boy in a
box, and as Dangar.Pír found him he brought him up, calling him
Malakh because he was good-looking.
The. Amzoni comprise the following septs :--Chiton, Umarzai, Kurvi
Kalla, Raghzi Kalla, Urmur Kalla, Ahmad Khel, Ali Khel, Fath Khel,
Bai Khel, Khatti Kalla, Kharri Kalla and Aghzan Kalla.
Amzon, the ancestor of these septs, is said to have been a Shammai
Khostwal who mixed with the Dáwaris. But the Fath Khel and Bal
Khel are known to be Wazírs, and the Urmur Kalla are by origin
Urmurs of Kaniguram.
The Darpa Khel consist of Darpa Khels, Panakzai and Khozi, and of
these the Panakzais are Momit Khel Dáwaris while the Khozis are
Akhunds. As regards Darpa Khel himself it is said that he was a
Khostwal, but others say that he was a Dum of Tanis.
The Idak sub-section is composed of three different septs,
Taritas, Madira, and Malle Khels, who agreed to settle in one village
on the Id day, whence the village was named Idak. The Malli Khel
are Turis, the Taritas are Kharotis, while the Madiras are Katti Khels.
The Isori are stated to be Khattaks. Of the Hassu Kbel, the Shinki
Khel are the offspring of a baby found near the Shinki Kotal or pass.
The Mosakkis are said to be Bangash Haidar Khels. Urmuz and
* But to this rule the Malakh form an exception, being much like the Wazírs, pastoral,
migratory and not keeping their women secluded.



Dárari customs.
227
Shammal are descendants of Tir who was an Isakhel, but another story
is that he came from the Wurdak country. All the rest of the septs
are Dáwarís proper.
Personal appearance.-The use of the spade in cultivating the stiff
soil of the valley has made the Dáwari á very broad-shouldered,
muscular man, not very tall, with thick legs and arms, beavy. in gait
and slow in his movements.
Personal habits. The vices of the Dáwarís are sodomy and charas.
smoking. The latter habit is said to be on the increase. The Dáwaris
are by repute the laziest and dirtiest of all the Wazíristán tribes. Cut
off from the outside world, they had no inducement to cultivate more
land than would ensure a supply of grain till the next barvest and
their habit of greasing their clothes with ghi makes them filthy to a
degree. There are no professional washermen in the valley.
The Dáwarís used to be famous for their hospitality, which took the
form of washing a guest's hands, spattering his clothes with ghi, and
scattering the blood of a goat or sheep ostentatiously on the outer walls
of the house as a sign that guests were being entertained. They were
also steadfast supporters of their clients' or hamsáyas' rights and true
to their engagements. They are now said to be losing these qualities.
Ornaments.-- Dáwari men used to dye the right eye with black anti-
mony and the left with red, colouring half their cheeks also in the same
way.* The men (but not the women) used also to wear coins sewn on
the breast of their cloaks as is commonly done by Ghilzai women.
Medicine.-The only treatinent in vogue is the common Pathán one
of killing a sheep, the flesh of which is given to the poor, and wrapping
the patient in the skin. This is the remedy for every disease and even
for a wound. Its efficacy is enhanced by the prayers recited by a
mullah, who also used sometimes to give amulets to, or sometimes
merely breathe on, the sick man. '
Cultivation.--Owing to the heavy nature of the soil the plough is not
used, all cultivation being done by the im, a spade with a long handle.
Wheat, barley, maize and inferior rice with, in a few villages, millet
and mung are sown. Fruit-trees are grown only near the villages and
trees and cultivation used to be confined to the area commanded by the
firearms possessed by each village.
Crafts.--The Dáwaris practise the weaving of coarse cloth, rude
carpentry and blacksmith's work, carpenters being the only artizans
known. These are employed to make doors for the houses, which are
mere huts, built by the people themselves.
Social organization. The Dáwarís, as is usual among the southern
Pathán tribes, are intensely democratic. The maliks, or headmen havo
little influence unless they have a strong following among their own
relations. The Dáwarís are fanatical and bigoted, and much undor the
influence of mullahs who exercise a powerful weapon in the right to
exclude a man from the religious congregation and other ceremonies.
Marriage Customs.--As among the Wazírs, the Dáwari wedding
customs are much the same as among other Pathán tribes. When the
* For a somewhat similar custom see the Indian Antiquary, 1906 p. 213.



228
Dáwari marriage.
parents are agreed that their son and daughter, respectively, are suited
and shall be married, a day is fixed and the bridegroom's kinsmen go
to the bride's guardian's house taking with them sheep rice and
Rs. 30 Kábuli with which to feast the bride's relatives and friends.
The marriage contract is then ratified, the two young people are
formally betrothed, and the price to be paid by the bridegroom for the
bride is fixed. The bride's guardians may ask any price they like, as
there is no fixed scale of prices in Dáwar, and unless the guardians are
amenable and remit a portion of the money demanded, the sum demanded
by them for the girl must be paid. The price thus paid is taken by the
girl's guardian, who is of course her father, if alive-if not her brother,
and if she has no brother, then by the relation who is by custom her
waris.* The guardian, however, sometimes gives a portion of the price
to the girl to fit herself out with ornaments, etc. Some few years ago a
determined effort was made by the maliks and mullahs of Lower Dáwar
to have the price of girls in Dáwar fixed at Rs. 200 for a virgin and
Rs. 100 for a widow. This they did because they thought that many
Dáwaris were prevented from marrying owing to the high prices de-
manded by guardians, which sometimes ran up to Rs. 1,000 and more,
and showed a tendency to increase rather than decrease. The majority
of the maliks were in favour of the proposal, and as a test case the
mullahs attempted last year to enforce the new custoin on the occasion
of the marriage of the sister of the chief malik of Tappi. Public
opinion, however, was too strong for the reformers and a serious riot
was only prevented by the intervention of the authorities. The usual
reference to the Political Officer on the subject was, of course, met
with the reply that, although he was glad to hear of the proposal, yet
he could not and would not interfere in what was a purely domestic
question for the Dáwarís themselves to settle. The subject was then
allowed to drop and now, as before, everyone can put what fancy
prices they like on their girls. The husband has no claim on the
girl until this ceremony (known locally as lasniwai or clasping of hands)
has been performed.
The next ceremony is that of nikah which is the congammation of
the marriage.
In Dáwar and Wazíristán boys and girls are betrothed at the ages
of 8 and 6 respectively, and the marriage is consummated at their
majority. Should the husband die after the lasniwai and before the
nikah, the girl becomes the property of his heirs, and one of them can
either marry her or they can give her in marriage elsewhere, provided
that she is given to a member of the same tribe and village and that
the parents copsent. If the parents do not consent, then they can
buy the girl back again by returning all the money received for
her, and are then free to marry her to whom they please. Simi-
Jarly a widow is married by one of the deceased's heirs, or they
may arrange a marriage for her elsewhere. She must, however,
be supported by them until she marries again, otherwise she is
free to marry as she chooses, and they are not entitled to exact money
* No money is given to the mother of the girl, except when she is a widow and has
boon tuued out by her late bushand's heirs, and has plone borne the cost of the
girl's upbringing.



Custom in Dárdr.
229
for her. As a rule the bride and bridegroom are much of an age, but
occasionally here as elsewhere some aged David takes his Abishag to
his bosom. These are not as a rule happy marriages. The expenses of
a wedding in Wazíristán are fairly heavy. A wealthy man will spend
as much as Rs. 1,500 or even Rs. 2,000 Kábuli. An ordinary well-to-do
man spends some Rs. 500 and a poor one Rs. 200 Kábuli. There
are no restrictions on intermarriage between Dáwaris and Wazírs.
They inter marry freely, and the majority of the bigger Dáwar maliks
have a Wazír wife, and the Wazír maliks living in Dáwar have
generally at least one Dáwari wife. As a rule Dáwaris do not give
their daughters to those living far away, wbich is probably due mostly
to the fact that those living far off do not come and ask for them, but
content themselves with something nearer home. The Mullah
Powindah who lives at Kamjuram has a Dáwarí wife of the village of
Idak, but this is an exception, and probably due to the fact tbat be-
fore our occupation and his rise to power, he used to live during the
six months of the cold season in Idak. There is no law or custom
regarding marriage.
Inheritance.--The ordinary Muhammadan laws hold good in Dáwar
with regard to inberitance.
CUSTOMARY LAW in DÁWAR.
General. With regard to offences against the human body, the
general principle of the customary penal law in Dáwar may be said
to be that of “an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.” For murder
the penalty is death; for bodily injury, bodily injury of a similar
nature. Nevertheless the Dáwari, though like every other Patháu, has.
his price, whereby his wounded body or side may be salved ; and for
most offences a fixed sum is laid down by paying which the offender
may satisfy the wrath of the party offended. The amount actually
paid, however, depends largely on the strength and influence of the
oppo-ing parties, the weaker usually having to go to the wall, being
mercilessly fleeced if the offending party, and having to be content
with little or nothing if offended. . As a general rule, for purposes of
calculating compensation a woman is considered as equal to balf a
man, and a Hindu is equal to a woman. Children over two years
old are considered men or women, according to sex, for purposes
of assessing compeosation. Customary law in Dáwar only takes
cognisance of the actual deed accomplished and not the intention
of the offender; for instance, there is no such thing in Dáwar,
as attempted murder. If the man is merely wounded in the attempt
compensation is only paid for the burt actually capsed. Again there
is no such thing as letting a man off because he killed another
man accidentally. Accident or no accident, the man is dead and the
penalty must be paid either in cash or kind. The right of self-defence
is recognised, but in no case does it extend to the killing or perma-
pent maiming of the person against whom it is exercised, not even if
he be attempting to commit murder. Should he be killed compensation
must be paid to his kins, and if permanently maimed to himself.
Revenge is, if possible, taken on the actual offender (badidár) while he
lives. But after his death his brother inherits the feud and after bim
the murderer's other heirs. If he leave no such relatives, his section is



230
Criminal Law in Dáwar.
responsible, if the injured party belongs to another section. If the
offended party kill a relation of the actual badidár, while he is still alive,
Rs. 100 must be paid as compensation. If the cffender and his brothers
die without revenge having been taken, and the inheritance falls to a
relation, that relation can, if he wishes to escape the feud, renounce the
heritage with the feud attached to it.
The tendency among the Dáwarís as among the Wazírs is to exact the
blood penalty, but if a man is afraid, he can get the village elders and
go and kill a sheep before the house of the offended party (a cere-
mony known as nánowati and have the compensation assessed and
the case settled in that way.
Murder.-In Dáwar, as far as the consequences of the deed are
concerned, there is no difference between murder and the accidental
killing of a man or woman. The penalty is the same in either case.
The punishment is death at the hands of the murdered man's relations,
or if they cannot inflict it themselves, at the hands of assassins bired
by them.
A murder can, however, be compounded on the intervention of the
village jirga by the payment of a sum varying from Rs. 1,000 to
Rs. 1,200 in cash. In some cases a woman is given in marriage to a
relative of the murdered man by the murderer, in which case the price
of the woman is agreed upon between the parties and deducted from
the amount of compensation to be paid. If both of the parties do not
compound the offence willingly, but one is forced to do 80 by the
other, or both are forced to do so by the village or tribal jirga, then
compensation is only paid in cash. The amount of compensation paid
for a woman is in all cases half that of a man, and the amount paid
for the murder of a Hindu is the same as that for a woman. There are
foar exceptions to the law that the death or hurt of a man or woman
must be avenged by the relations, either by taking a life or by taking
money in compensation. The exceptions are
(i) If a man is accidentally killed or hurt in a nandasa (the name
given to the local dance at the Id): unless it can be prov-
ed that tbe man who killed the other had a fevd or any
- grudge against the deceased.
(ii) If any one be accidentally hurt or killed in the stone-throwing
which sometimes accompanies a wedding : provided always
that there is no grudge or feud.
(ii) At a tent-pegging match if a rider warn the bystanders that
his horse is unmanageable, no claim lies against him if
any one is injured.
(iv) If a man cutting wood from a tree warn people sitting under
the tree, he is not responsible for any accident that may
occur from falling branches.
If a person is injured by a runaway horse or other animal, the animal
is usually given in compensation. The burden of proof of any injury
being accidental is on the party who inflicts it. A council of elders is
summoned at his expense, and if he can satisfy them that it really was
an accident, they assess the compensation as they think fit. All feuds
are suspended while the parties are out with a tribal lashkar or chigha.



Criminal Law in Dáwar.
231
The rates of compensation for a female are the same as those for
a male, as also are those for Hindus, but in the Malakb ilága the
rates for women are only half those for men, and Hindus are con-
sidered equal to women.
Under the custom the punishment for a hurt is a hurt of similar
pature to that inflicted, i, e., for the loss of a limb the punishment is
the loss of that limb; for a wound, a similar wound; for a nose or ear
cut, a dose or ear cut. There is, however, a scale of compensation*
fixed by which nearly every form of hurt can be compensated. This
scale is as follows:-
For the permanent total disablement of an arm or a leg, Rs. 500.
If the disablement be pot quite total then the compensation is Rs. 250,
and if it be only slight Rs. 120.
Rs.
For the loss of one eye ... . ..
250
Ditto both eyes . ...
The rates for the loss of fingers are-
Thumb
... ... ... . .. ... los ... 50
1st finger .
.... .... 30
4th 1
... ... ... ... ..... 20
The compensation for cutting off a nose is from Rs. 500 to Rs. 600.
Ears are paid for at Rs. 100 a piece. The compensation for a wound is
Rs. 10 to Rs. 100 according to its nature, and that payable for teeth is -
2nd
3rd
so
?
soi
Front, upper or lower
............. ... 100
Further back
Back teeth ...
*** in. ... 25
Adultery.--If the parties are caught in the act, both may be killed, but
in the Malakh and Tappizai iláqas (where a woman is considered half
* In the Malakh ilága the scale is somewhat different, though for permanent disable.
ment of a limb it is the same.
Rs.
For the loss of one eye ... ... . .. ... ... ... 500
both eyes ... ... ... ... ..
1,000
Compensation for fingers :-
First joint.
it
Second
joint.
Third joint.
Rs.
Rs.
Rs.
130
Thumb
1st finger
250
60
...
120
2od
18
30
3rd
17-8
12.8
4th
1
•
Rs.
The compensation for a wounded pose is Rs. 85, or if cut off entirely Rs, 500.
A wound in the face more than one finger in breadth 18 Rs. 85, but if on any other
part it is only Rs. 12.8 per finger breadtb.
For teeth the compensation is--
Two front, apper or lower ...
.. 100 each
Next two,
Next two,
Back teeth,



282
The Dáwi Pathans.
e comperial II alakh iláguit with intesation
a man) the woman alone can be killed and the man's foot cut off, and
if the man is killed half the compensation for bis murder must be
paid. This is the invariable rule in the Dalakh iláqa.
For rape the man may be killed, and for an assault with intent to
outrage a woman's modesty he may be killed and half compensation
paid, or his foot may be cut off. For house trespass in order to
commit adultery the mau's nose or ear may be cut off, and if the huge
band suspects his wife of being a consenting party, he may kill her.
The penalty for elopement or abduction is death or Rs. 1,000. Should
a woman go wrong and become a bad character the husbaud way cut
off her nose and divorce her. Should she then marry again he is
entitled to no compensation.
Offences ugainst property.-The punishments for burglary, robbery
and theft are all much the same. The amount, stolen, with compensa-
tion for the damage done and the expenses of the suit are recovered,
plus a village fine of Rs. 40 to Rs. 200* according to the offender's
means. If no damage is done and no property stolen, only the village
fine is recovered.
Arson. In cases of arson the risker is referred to the village jirga
which, if the offence is proved, realises a village fine of from Rs. 100
to Rs. 200. Oümpensation is also realised and paid to the offended
party.t Should loss of life result from the fire, the penalty for murder
who perishes in the flames, is exacted in addition, for every person.
Cutting of crops.-Compensation for the damage done is paid, as well
as a fine of Rs. 5 if the offence is committed by night, and Rs. 2
or Rs. 3 if the offence is committed by day.
Dáwi, a tribe of Ghorgasht Patháns, descended from Dáwai, son of Dánai,
and so akin to the KÁKAR, Nághar and Parni. The Dáwi live in the
tract held by the last named, occupying Sangár or Sang-Mandáli, and
the Zarghún Darra or 'green valley. Dáwai had two sons, Domarah
and Homarah and adopted three more, viz., Khwardai, Zamar ,and
Samar, according to the most authentic account, but other traditions
omit the two last-named. The story goes that Dáwai espoused the
widow of a Sayyid of Khujand, and adopted her son by him. His
name was Hasan, but in his youth he was notorious as a robber (ghal).
He repented, however, of his misdeeds and became the disciple of a
saint of Multán, married a Pathán wife and had four sops, Musa, Ali,
Sikandar and Balíl, whose descendants are known as Hasani or Khúndi
(lit. protected), a corruption probably of Khujandi. The Hagani, being
of Sayçid blood dwell among other tribes as their spiritual guide, and
Shaikh Hasan Dáwi, I one of the most famous of them, attached himself
to the Shaikh-ul-Islám Baha-ul-Haqq-wa-ud-Din Zakariaş of Multán,
and was buried at a spot between Tul aud Sambar. His tomb is still a
place of pilgrimage and tales of his power of thought-reading are
still told. Another Dáwi saint was Shaikh Neknám, and a third
* In the Malakh iláqa the fine is Rs. 60 and in Dangar Khel Rs. 100
+ In the Malakh ilága donble compensation is paid.
I Not to be confused with Hasan. Dáwi, the progenitor of the tribe.
$ The Saint of Multán' who died in 1265.6 at the age of 100. He was
the Shaikh-ul-Kámil, Shaháb-ud-Din, son of Abú-Hifz, Umar.08-Sah arwardi.
disciple of



Daya-Desváli.
2013
Shaikh Haji Abu Ishaq, who was accounted an Afghán because his
mother was an Afghán. He was a contemporary of Sultán Sher Shah
and dwelt at Kaithal.
Dárá, a synonym for Máchhi in Multán, fem. dái (so called because women
of the Machhi caste act as wet-nurses). Cf. Vaidehá.
DAYÁL, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DEDHAR, a Gujar clan (agricultural) fonnd in Amritsar.
DEHGÁN, Diacán, Djagán, an Iranian (Tajik) tribe (or rather class, as the
word means husbandman) which is represented by the SAALMÁNIS of the
Peshawar valley. Raverty says that the Chaghán-Sarai valley on the
west side of the Chitral river also contains several large Dihgán villages
which owe allegiance to the Sayyids of Kúnar.
Depia, one of the principal clans of the Játs in Karnál. It has its head-
quarters at Ludhiana and originally came from Rohtak. Probably the
same as Dabia.
Dehr, a Muhammadan Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
DEO,_(1). À title of several ancient ruling families, used as an affix, like
Chand or Singh. It was thus used by the old dynasty of Jammú.
(2). A tribe of Játs which is practically confined to the Sialkot
district where they regard Sankatra as one of their ancestors and have a
highly revered spot dedicated to him, in the town of that name, in '
tahsil Zafarwál. They claim a very ancient origin, but not Rajput.
Their ancestor is said to be Maháj, who came from “the Saki jungle" in
Hindústán. Of his five sons, Sobál, Kom, Dewal, Aulakh and Deo, the two
latter gave their names to two Ját tribes, while the other branches dis-
persed over Gujranwala and Jhang. But another story refers them to Rájá
Jagdeo, a Súrajbansi Rájput. They have the same marriage ceremony
as the Sáhi, and also use the goat's blood in a similar manner in honour
of their ancestors, and have several very peculiar customs. They will
not intermarry with the Mán Játs, with whom they have some ancestral
connection. Also found in Apritsar.
Deoániá, a Ját tribe found in Siálkot and apparently distinct from the Deo.
L'EORA, a sept of Kanets descended from a son of Tegh Chand, third son of
Rájá Kahn Chand of Kahlúr.
DEowáná, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
DERÍJA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Desí, (i) of the country, fr. des, country; (ii) of the plains, as opposed to
pahári, of the hills : cf. P. Dicty., p. 287; (iii) a Ját clan (agricultural)
Found in Multán. Cf. Deswali.
DøswÁL, 'men of the country,' a Ját tribe, sprung from the same stock as
the Dalál. They are most numerous in Rohtak, Gurgaon, and Karnál.
In Mewar and Ajmer, Musalmán Rájputs are called Deswál, and are
hardly recognised as Rájputs.
Deswálá, a territorial term sometimes applied to certain Ját tribes as opposed
to Pachhamwálá.
Deswálí, opposed to Bágrí, q.v.
Their listan. Of his names to twghang. B



234
Dewa-Dhamani
Dewi, a title given in Sirmúr to Kanet families which perform priestly duties
in the deotas' temples. A Dewá will generally marry in a Dowa family
and a Negí in a Negí family. The Devas rank below the Bháts and
above the Dethis, and are intimately connected with the deotas whom
they serye : e.g., the temple of Mahásu must be closed for 20 days if
there is a birth or death in the Dewa's family-see the Sirmúr Gazetteer,
pp. 42–44. Cf. Karan.
The form of this desigoation in the Simla Hills appears to be dinwân.
Dewal, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Dewála, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DEWAR, a Ját alan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DHABA, DABHA, Dhabí, DIBAA, syns. of Dhobí, q.v.
DHABBA, a Khatri sub-division.
DAADAH, a tribe of Játs, found in Kapurthala, whither it migrated from Delhi.
Dráðhí, Dráðí, a musician, singer or panegyrist; fr. dhád, a kind of
tabor. În the Deraját, however, the Dhádí ořly chants and never, it
is said, plays on any instrument: he is also said not to intermarry with
the Dúm. In Multán ho is a panegyrist, if given alms ; if not, he curses.
DHAKAR, & Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar
DHAKKAR, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
DHAKKÚ, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur and Montgomery. Classed
both as Rájput and Ját in the latter district.
DHAKOCHI, a sub-caste of Brahmans in the hills of Hazára, which allows
widow remarriage. It does not intermarry or eat with the Pahária, the
other sub-caste of Brahmans in these hills.
DHÁLÁ, & caster of metals.
DHALÁN, & small Ját clan found in Bawal (Nábha State). They derive
their origin from Rájá Dhal, a Tunwar ruler of Hastinapar, who
lost caste by marrying a foreign wife.
DHALí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Dgáli, a tribe of Muhammadan Játs, found in Gujrát, where its founder, a
Bhatti Rajput, obtained a grant of land from Akbar in exchange for a
fine sbield, dhál, which he possessed..
Drálíwál, see Dháríwál.
Dhalon, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DAAMÁLI, a class of Muhammadan faqirs (= Jalálí). fr. dhamál, leaping and
whirling
DAAMÁN, an endogamous occupational sub-caste of the Lohár-Tarkhan
castes, fr. dhauna 'to blow' the bellows. The Dhamán are black-
smiths, as opposed to the Khatti or carpenter' sub-caste. The
Dhamán is by far the largest group among the Tarkháns and forms
a true sub-caste in Sirsa, in Hoshiarpur (in which district the Dhamáns
and Khattis will not eat or smoke together) and probably throughout
the eastern districts, as far north as Gujranwala. The Dhamáns
include the Hindu SUTHÁRS, 9.v.



will are not hunde, dhanashka, f the Provinced the Punjab
looke they do nightsoi, emoconly diferenteman, but the Wilson for proper
of all the leavinbut they af weaving will do en Chúhras inaks of the
Dhamra-Dhari.
285
DAAMRA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
DHÁNAK, a caste, essentially of Hindustan and not of the Punjab proper,
and confined to the south-east of the Province. Wilson derives the
names from the Sansk. dhanashka, bowman, but the Dhánaks of the
Punjab are not hunters and only differ from the Chúhrás in that they
will not remove nightsoil, though they will do general scavenging. In
villages they do a great deal of weaving also: The Ohúhrás are said to
look down on them, but they are apparently on an equality, as neither
will eat the leavings of the other though each will eat the leavings
of all other tribes except Sársís, not excluding even Khatiks.
There are, practically speaking, no Sikh or Mussalmán Dhánaks,
and their creed would appear to be that of the Chúhras. The only
considerable tribe the Dhánaks have returned is Lál Gurú, another
name for Lál Beg, the eweeper Gurú. But they are said to burn their
dead. They marry by phera and no Brahman will officiate. They also
appear to be closely allied to the Pasis.* See Lálbegi.
DAÁNDá, a small clan of Játs, found in Jind, Their jathera is Swamí
Sundar Dás, at whose samadh milk is offered on the 12th sudi every
month : beestings also are offered, and, at weddings, a lamp is lighted
there.
DHANDSAHAR, a Ját clau (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DAANGE, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DHANIÁL, a tribe of Rajput status which belongs to the group of hill tribes
of the Salt-range Tract. It is from them that the Dham country in the
Chakwal tabsíl of Jhelum takes its name; and there appears still to be
a colony of them in those parts, though they are now chiefly found in
the lower western hills of the Murree range, being separated from the
Satti by the Ket wál. They claim to be descended from Ali, son-in-law
of the Prophet. They are a fine martial set of men and furnish many
recruits for the army, but were always a turbulent set, and most of the
serious crime of the surrounding country used to be ascribed to them.
Many of them are of Ját status.
DHAŅJon, an Aráín clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. Also a Kamboh
clan in that District and in Montgomery. In the latter it is both Hindn
and Muhammadan.
DHANKAR, a Ját tribe of the same stock as the Ráthi. They are almost
confined to Jhajjar tahsíl in Rohtak, and are perhaps nothing more
than a local clan of the Ráthi tribe.
DAANOE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DHANRÁí, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Daaşží, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DHAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DHARI, a bard (Monckton's S. R. Gujrát, 53), doubtless=Daapí, q.v.
* In Karnál they are regularly employed in weaving. But they also collect cow.dung and
take it to the fields, and get a chapárti a day from each client's house and a little at barvest,



236
Dhariwal-Dhaunchak..
Daáríwál.-The Dháríwál, Dhání. or Dhaliwal, (or, in Karnál, Phor) Játs, for
the name is spelt in all three ways, are said to be Bhatti Rájputs, and
to take their name from their place of origin Dháránagar. They say that
Akbar married the daughter* of their chief, Mihr Mitha. They are
found chiely on the Upper Sutlej and in the fertile district to the west,
their head-quarters being the north-western corner of the Málwa, or
Ludhiana, Ferozepur, and the adjoining parts of Pațiála. Mr. Brandreth
describes them as splendid cultivators, and the most peaceful and con-
tented portion of the population of the tract. Akbar conferred the
title of Mián on Mibr Mitha and gave him 120 villages round Dhaula
Kángarf in jágír. The Dháriwál have undoubtedly been settled in
that part from an early period, and the south-east angle of the Moga
tahsil is still called the Dhaliwal tappa. Mitha's descendants are still
called Míán, but they are said not to have been converted to Islám
though for several generations their leaders bore distinctly Muham-
madan names. However this may be Mihr Mitha is now their sidh
with a shrive at Lallawala in Pațiála, and on the 2nd sudi of each
month sweetened bread and milk are offered to it. In Sialkot, however,
their sidh is called Bhoi and his seat is said to be at Janers Fatta.
The Dhariwal are divided into two groups, Udhi or Odi and Moni
or Múni (who alono are said to be followers of Mihr Mitha in Gujrán-
wála).
DHARKHÁN, a synonym of Tarkhán (9..) throughout the South-West Punjab.
In Jhang they are all Muhammadans and have Awán, Bharmi, Bhatti,
Dhadhi, Gilotar, Janjúhán, Kari, Khokhar, Saharar, Sáhte and Siál
septs. The latter when the first tonşure of a child is performed, cook 21
bhasarís or cakes, each containing 11 sers of wheat-four, and of these
the eldest of the family eats one, the second is given in alnis and the
third (1) is eaten by the girls of the family.
DHARÚKRA, a group, practically a sub-caste, of Brahmans found in Gurgaon,
who have become out-castes because they adopted the custom of widow
remarriage. The name may be derived from dharel, a concabine, or
dharewa, marriage of a widow. They are Gauſs.
Dhasí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Dhaul, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur, and, as Muhammadan Játs,
in Montgomery.
DRAULKá, an agricultural clan found in Shabpur.
DHAUN (DHAWAN), a Khatri got, see P. Dicty., p. 304.
DAAUNCHAK, one of the principal clans of the Játs in Karnál, with its head.
quarters at Binjhaul. Intermarries in Rohtak.
* As her dower 100 ghumaos of land were given her at Kángar and this land was trans
ferred to Delhi and kept as the burial ground of the Mugaal emperors !
+ Mihr or Mahr, 'chief, and Mitha, a name unknown to Akbar's bistorians.
* Dhaula, the 'white' house or palace. Kángar is in Patiala territory to the south-ea
of Moga.
& Janer is described by Cunningham, Arch. Survey Reports XIV, 67-69,
ll Punjab Customary Law, II, p. 132,



DhaugriDhillon.
237
DHAUGRI, see DROGBI.
Daawna, a Rajput clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Daer, a tribe of Játs found in Multán, where they settled in Akbar's time.
DHED, lit. a crow; a leather-worker.
DHED, DAER, DAED, (see above). A synonym for Chamár. The term is,
however, used, for any low fellow,' though especially applied to a
Chamár. In the Punjab the Dhedh is not a separate caste, as it is in
Bombay and the Central Provinces.
DAEŅDYE, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
DAER, a tribe of Játs claiming Solar Rájput origin through its eponym
and his descendant Harpál who settled near Kalanaur and thence it
migrated into Siálkoț..
Dhesí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DADAA, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Daduána, a clan of the Sials.
Daílá, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
DAILLON, DailLHON.--The Dhillon* is one of the largest and most widely dis-
tributed Ját tribes in the Punjab, especially in the Sikh Districts.
Their head-quarters would appear to be Gujranwala and Amritsar ; but
they are found in large numbers along the whole course of the Sutlej
from Ferozepur upwards, and under the hills to the east of those two
Districts. The numbers returned for the Delhi District are curiously
large, and it is doubtful whether they really refer to the same tribe.
Like the Goráya they claim to be Saroha Rajputs by origin, and to
have come from Sirsa. If this be true they have probably moved up
the Sutlej, and then spread along westwards under the bills. But
another story makes them descendants of a Surajbangi, Rajput named
Lu who lived at Khármor in the Málwa, and held some office at the
Delhi coart. They are said to be divided into three great sections, the
Báj, Sáj and Sánda.
Another pedigree is assigned them in Amritsar. It makes La (Loh
Sain) son of Rájá Karn, thus :-
SURAJ (Sun),
Karn, born at Karn Bás in Bulandshahr.
Loh Sain. Chata' Sain. Brikh sain, Chandar Sain,
Dhillon.
Karn's birth is described in the legend that Rájá Kauntal had a
daughter Kunti by name, who was married to Rájá Pándav War-
bháshá rikhi taught her a mantra by which she could bring the sun
under her influence and by its power she bore Karn who became Rájá
of Hastinápur. When Pándav renounced his kingdom after the battle
at Kúrúchhetar and Rájá Karn had been killed in the battle, Dhalon
* Folk-etymology connects the name with dhilla, 'lazy.' It is also said to be derived
rom a word meaning 'gentle.'



Diálkot the Dhanges, where he is noth Karn is said to handa, where hi
Ganda Singi mislackera is Daud Shahipped on the chave a temple tesis
288
Dhindsa-Dhirike.
left Hastinapur and settled in Wangar near Bhatinda, where his
descendants lived for 10 generations. Karn is said to have a temple at
Amb on the Ganges, where he is worshipped on the Chet chaudas. In
Sialkot the Dhillu jathera is Dáúd Shah, and he is revered at weddings.
The Bhangi misl of the Sikhs was founded by a Dhillon, Sirdár
Garda Singh. In Amritsar the Dhillon do not marry with the Bal
because once a mirásí of the Dhillons was in difficulties in a Bal village,
and they refused to help him, so the Dhillons of the Manjha do not even
drink water from a Bal's hands; nor will the mirásis of the Dhillon
intermarry with those of the Bal. In Ludbiána at Dhillon village there
is a shrine of the tribal jathera, who is called Bábájí. Gur is offered to
him at weddings and he is worshipped at the Diwali, Brahmans taking
the offerings.
DAINDSA, a Ját tribe, which would appear to be confined to Ambála, Ludhiana
and the adjoining portion of Patiala. They claim to be descended from
.. Saroha Rájputs. In Jind their Sidh is Bábá Harnám Dás, a Bairagi of
the 17th century, whose shrine is at Khariál in Karnál. Offerings are
made to it at weddings. In Sialkot the Dhindsa also revere & satis tomb.
DAíng, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Dainwar, DaÍMAR.--The word Dhínwar is undoubtedly a variant of JainwAB,*
while the term Dhímar is a corruption of it, with possibly, in the Punjab,
a punning allusion to the custom described below. The Dhínwar is
confined in the Punjab to the tracts round Delhi, where the word is also
applied to any person of dark complexion. The Dhínwars are divided
into two groups, one of which makes baskets and carries pálkis, works
ferries and is in fact a KAHÁR. Many of this group are fishermen or
boatmen, and call themselves Mallabs, while some are Bharbhúnjás.
The other group is so criminal in its tendencies that it was once pro-
posed to proclaim the Dhínwars a criminal tribe, but violent crime is rare
among them and though they wander all over the Punjab, disguised as
musicians, begging, pilfering and even committing burglary or theft on
a large scale, many of them are cultivators and some even own land.
The Dhínwars of Gurgaon once used to marry a girl to Bhaironji, and
she was expected to die within the year. The Dhímars do not own the
Dhínwars as the latter are notorious thieves. No Hindu of good caste
will take water from a Dhínwar's hands, though he will accept it from
a Dhímar. (The latter caste appears to be the equivalent of the Jhínwar
in the United and Central Provinces). See also under Jhínwar.
DaíRMALIA, the second oldest sect of Sikhs. The Dhírmalia owe their origin
to Dhírral,t who refused to acknowledge Gurú Har Rai, his younger
brother, as the Gurú. The sect has an important station at Chak Rám
Dás in Shahpur, where the Bháis descended from Dhírmal own the
village lands. They have a considerable following, chiefly of Khatrís
and Aroſas. Bábá Bar Bhág Singh, another member of the family, has
& shrine at Mairí, near Amb in Hoshiarpur. The sect has no special
tenente differentiating it from the Nánakpanthis.
DAIRUKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
* For jh - dh, cf. rijhu, cooked, for ridhi : bajha húá, for bandhá húá, tied : rujjha, for
ruddha, busy, and otber examples.
+ Not the second son of Rámdás, the 4th Gurú, as sometimes stated, but of Gurditta, the
Udási who never became Gurú.



Dhubi
Dhotar.
289.
and ho had posibile refore, women genommers as occupies
tribery low, tomound in wash thong the Test position lag
DHOBI, perhaps the most clearly defined ard the one most nearly approaching
a true caste of all the Menial and Artisan castes. He is found under
that pame throughout the Punjab, but in the Deraját and the Multán
Division he is undistinguishable from the Charhoa. He is the washer-
man of the country, but with washing he generally combines, especially
in the centre and west of the Province, the craft of calico-printing,
and undoubtedly in these parts the Dhobi and Chhímba castes overlap.
The Dhobi is a true village menial in the sense that he receives a fixed
share of the produce in return for washing the clothes of the villages
where he performs that office. But he occupies this position only
among the higher castes of landowners, as among the Játs and castes
of similar standing the women generally wash the clothes of the family.
The Dhobi is, therefore, to be found in largest number in the towns.
His social position is very low, for his occupation is considered impure;
and he alone of the tribes which are not outcast will imitate the Kumhár
in keeping and using a donkey. He stands below the Náí, but perhaps
above the Kumhár. He often takes to working as a Darzi or tailor,
and in Peshawar dhobi simply means a dyer (rangrez). He is most
often a Musalmán. His title is barita or khalifa, the latt er being the
title of the heads of his guild,
The Dhobi sections appear to be few. They include :-
1. Agrai.
5. Kamboh.
9. Rikhari,
2. Akthra.
6. Khokhar.
10 Lárli.
3. Bhalam.
7. Koháns.
11. Lippal.
4. Bhatti.
8. Mahmal.
(Those italicised are also Chhím ba and Chaşhoa gots, Nos. 1, 3 and
9 being also Chaphoa gots). The Hindu Dhobis in Kapurthala say they
are immigrapts from the United Provinces and preserye four of their
original seveu gots, viz., Magia, Márwáir, Balwar and Kanaujia, while
the Mubamimadan sections are said to be Galanjar, Mohar, Role, Sangári,
Saukhar and Satal.
DHODá, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
DEODI BAANDAH, KHAȚAR, NAMONÁNA and WAIR, four Rájpút septs (agricul-
tural) found in Multán.
DAOGRI, the ironsmiths, miners and charcoal-burners of the Barmaur wizárat
of Chamba State, where, when holding land as tenants, they are, like
other low-castes, termed jhumriálú, lit. 'family servants'. In Kullú
territory all say the term dhogri is applied to any Dághí or Koli who
takes to iron-smelting : cf. CHHAZANG for the Dhongru Káru in Spiti.
The name is probably connected with dhaukní, etc., bellows,' and
dhauna, 'to blow the bellows.'
DAOL, a tribe of Játs, found in Kapúrthala, whither it migrated from the
East, beyond the Juwna, after settling in Amritsar : see also Dhaul.
Doorí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
Daot, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Montgomery
in the latter both Hindu and Muhammadan.
DAOTAR, a Ját tribe, almost entirely conGned to Gujranwála. They are mostly
Hiódus, and claim to be descended from a Solar Rájput who emigrated
from Hindústán or, according to another story, from Ghazni, soine 20
generations back.'
WV
borg, fromájput hey are



240
Dhudhi-Dhúnd.
Dauphí, Dhudhí, a tribe of Muhammadans found in Pakpattan tahsil,
Montgomery district, and akin to the Raths. In this district it is
classed as Rájput, Ját, Aráín, and in Shahpur as Ját. Io Montgomery
the Dhudhí Hutiána rank as Rájputs.
DAUDHIAL, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
Daudai, a small clan of Punwár Rájpúts found with their kinsmen the Ráthor
scattered along the Sutlej and Chenáb. Their original seat is said to
have been in the Mailsí tahsil of Multán, where they are mentioned as
early as the first half of the 14th century. When the Delhi empire was
breaking up they spread along the rivers. One of them, Haji Sher Mu-
hainmad, was a saint whose shrine in Multán is still renowned. They
are said to be “fair agriculturists and respectable members of society.”
Daudi, a Ját tribe found in tabsil Mailsi, district Multán, and formerly, in
the 13th century, established in the extreme east of it.
Daúl, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur and, as Rájputs, in Montgomery.
DHUL, one of the principal clans of the Jáțs in Karnál, with its head-quarters
at Pai.
DHULLU Baartí, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
DAÚND, the Dhúnd with the Satti, and Ketwal, occupy nearly the whole of
the Murree and Hazára Hills on the right bank of the Jhelum in the
Hazára and Ráwalpindi districts. Of the three the Dhúnd are the most
northern, being found in the Abbottábád tahsil of Hazára and in the
northern tracts of Ráwalpindi, while below them come the Satti.
Andwal appears to be one of the Dhúnd clans. They claim to be
descendants of Abbás, the paternal uncle of the Prophet; but another
tradition is that their ancestor Takht Khán came with Taimúr to Delhi
where he settled; and that his descendant Zoráb Khán went to Kahúta
in the time of Shah Jahan, and begat the ancestors of the Jadwal,
Dhúnd, Sarrára, and Tanáoli tribes. His son Khalára or Kulu Rai was
sent to Kashmír, and married a Kashmiri woman from whom the Dhúnd
are sprung, and also a Ketwal woman. From another illegitimate son of
his the Satti, who are the bitter enemies of the Dhúnd, are said to have
sprung ; but this the Satti deny and claim descent from no less a person
than Nausherwán. These traditions are of course absurd. Kulu Rai is
a Hindu name, and one tradition makes him brought up by a Brahman,
Colonel Wace wrote of the Dhúnd and Karral: “Thirty years ago their
acquaintance with the Muhammadan faith was still slight, and though
they now know more of it, and are more careful to observe it, relics of
their Hindu faith are still observable in their social habits." This much
appears certain that the Dhúnd, Satti, Bib, Chibh, and many others,
are all of Hindu origin, all originally occupants of the hills on this part
of the Jhelum, and all probably more or less connected. Among the
Punwar clans mentioned by Tod, and supposed by him to be extinct, are
the Dhoonda, Soruteah, Bheeba, Dhúnd, Jeebra, and Dhocnta ; and it
is not impossible that these tribes may be Punwár clans. The history of
these tribes is given at pages 592 ff of Sir Lepel Griffin's Punjab Chiefs.
They were almost exterminated by the Sikhs in 1837, Colonel Cracroft
considered the Dhúnd and Satti of Rawalpindi to be a 'treacherous,
feeble, and dangerous population,' and rendered especially dangerous by
their close connection with the Karrál and Dhúnd of Hazára. He says



Dhunia-Dilazák.
241
that the Satti are a finer and more vigorous race and less inconstant
and volatile than the Dhúnd, whose traditional enemies they are. Sir
Lepel Griffin wrote that the Dhúnd “have ever been a lawless untract.
able race, but their courage is not equal to their disposition to do evil."
On the other hand, Major Wace described both the Dhúnd and Karrál as
"attached to their homes and fields, which they cultivate simply and
industriously. For the rest their character is crafty and cowardly."
Both tribes broke into open rebellion in 1857, and the Dhúnd were
severely chastised in Ráwalpindi, but left unpunished in Hazára.
Mr. E. B. Steedman said : “ The hillmen of Rawalpindi are pot of very
fine physique. They have a good deal of pride of race, but are rather
squalid in appearance. The rank and file are poor, holding but little
land and depending chiefly on their cattle for a livelihood. They have ·
a great dislike to leaving the hills, especially in the hot weather, when
they go up as high as they can, and descend into the valleys during the
cold weather. They stand high in the social scale." In Hazára the
local tradition makes two of the two main Dhúnd clans, Chandiál and
Ratniál, descendants of two Rajput chiefs who were descended from Gahi,
ruler of a tract wound Deili. To this day they refuse to eat with other
Muhammadays or even to allow them to touch their cooking vessels.
At weddings they retnin the Hindu custom, whereby the baråt or pro-
cession spends 2 or 3 days at the house of the bride's father, and various
other findu social observances. They rarely marry outside the tribe,
but polygamy is fairly common among them.* Mr. H. D. Watson
describes them as physically rather a fine race, and intelligent, but
factious and unscrupulous.
Daunia, a synonym for Penja (q. v.). See also under Kandera.
Daúəsar, Dhúsar, see under Bhargava Dhúsar.
Dhossa.-A daughter of Guru Har Rai married a Gend Khatri of Pasrúr,
named Amar Singh, whose descendants are called dhussas or intruders,
but no sect of this naine appears in our Census tables.
DIHADRÁE, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Dilazák, an important Pathán tribe.
The Dilazák were the first Afghán tribe to enter the Peshawar valley,
and the Akhúnd, Darweza, avers that they came first into Nangrahárt
ven to allowindu custom, whide's father, anthe tribe,
-
* E, Molloy, in P. N. Q. II, § 281.
† The Dilazáks first entered Nangrahár from the west or south-west and, prior to Tímúr's
invasion, settled in the Pesháwar valley, allying themselves with the Shalmánís. In Bábar's
time and under Akbar they held Wálásau and the eastern part of Bájauſ. They assigned the
Doába to the Yúsufzais and Mandars and they in turn to the Gagyánís, but the latter were defeat-
ed by the Dilazáks. Upon this the Khashis, headed by Malik Ahmad, the Mandap chief, attacked
the Dilazáks and drove them out of all their territories north of the Kábul river. The Khalíls
and Mohmands then induced Kámrán to attack the Dilazáks and he expelled them from Pesha-
war and all their possessions west of the Indus (c 1533-4). Subsequently (c. 1549.50) Khán
Kaju, Malik Ahmad's successor, formed a great confederation of Khashi tribes and defeated the
Ghwária Khel, headed by the Khalils, at Shaikh Tapúr in 15499-50. Khán Kaju's power may be
gauged from the fact that he had at one time a force of 150,000 men under his command and his
authority was acknowledged from Nangrahár to the Maragalla pass, and from Upper Swist to
Pindi and Kálábágh. Adam Khán Gakhar is said to have been his feudatory. Three or four
years later in 1552 Humáyún reached Pesháwar, which fortress he found in ruins, and appointed
Sikandar Khan the Cossack (Qazák) its governor. Soon after 1552 Khán Kaju marched on
Bágram and there invested Sikandar, but having no artillery or other firearms was compelled
to raise the siega. Khán Kaju's Mulla or chief priest and mịuister was Shaikh Mali who divided
the conquered lands among the Khashiş.



242
Dindáy-Dirmán.
to the indie held the enten to the sea Bajaus, which hold the expelons
from the west and passed on eastward before the time of Tímúr. Enter.
ing the vale of Peshawar they formed an alliance with the Shalmánís,
w.ho were then subject to the Sultan of Swát, and subdued or expelled,
exterminated or absorbed the other tribes which held the valley. Thus
they occupied the eastern part of Bájauſ, and their territory extended
from the Jinde river to the Kálápani and the hills of Swát. The
Shalmánís held the Hashtnagar tract, but all the lands from Bajaur
to the Indus north of the Kábul and south of it as far as the Afrídi
bills, were Dilazák territory when the Khashi Pathans appeared on
the scene. That branch of the Afghán nation had been expelled from
their seats near Kábul by Mirza Ulugh Beg, Bábar's uncle, they ap.
plied for aid to the Dilazáks and were by them assigned the Shabkadr
Do-ábah or tract between the two rivers.
Accordingly the Yusufzai ard Mandar tribes of the Khashis settled
in the Do-ábal, and some under the Mandar chief, Mír Jamal Amánzai,
spread towards Ambar and Dánishkol, while many Mandars and some
of the Yusufzais pushed on into Bajauſ. Then they came into collision
with the Umr Khel Dilazáks, who held the Chandáwal valley, and defeated
them with the loss of their chief, Malik Haibu. The Yusufzai, Mandar
and Khalíl* then divided Bájaus among themselves, but soon fell out
and in the end the Khalíls were crushed in a battle fought in the Hindu-
ráj valley. The Khalíls never again obtained a footing in Bájauſ.
Meanwhile the Gagiápís had attempted to set a footing in Bájaır
but failed and besought Mahk Ahmad Mandar for aid. He assigned
the Do-ábah to them, but they soon found cause of quarrel with the
Dilazáks, and even with the Yúsufzais and Mandars also. In 1519
the Gagiánis brought Bábar into the Hashtnagar tract, ostensibly
against the Dilazáks, with whom the Yusufzai and Mandars left them
to fight it out. In the result the Dilazák completely overthrew the
Gagiánís. The former were elated at their victory, and thus aroused
the jealousy of Malik Ahmad, who formed a great Khashi confederacy,
including various vassals of the Yusufzai and Mandar. In a great
battle fought in the Guzar Rúd, between Katlang and Shahbázgarhi,
the Dilazáks were defeated with great loss, but in the pursuit Ahmad's
son Khán Kaju chivalrously allowed the Dilazák women to escape across
the Indus. He subsequently received the hand of the daughter of
the Dilazák chief, and the political downfall of the Dilazák was
thereby sealed. As good subjects of Bábar they were obnoxious to
Mirza Kámrán, and this doubtless accounts for the failure of all their
attempts to retrieve their position, since they were only finally overcome
after much severe fighting. In alliance with Kámran the Khalíls
sought to despoil the Dilazáks of their remaining lands, and by 1534
they had obtained possession of the country from Dhaka to Attock,
together with the Khyber and Karappa passes.
Díndár, possessed of the Faith': a term applied to a Chúhrá, Chamár
or any other low-caste convert to Islam. Better class converts are
called Naumuslim, Sheikh or somewhat contemptuously, Sheikhřá. Cf.
Khoáh
DIRMÁN, (a corruption of Abdur-rahmán) an Afghán sept of the KHAGIANI tribe.
the jealong the one that he whom into thes and made of gaan klo
* The Khalíls had quarrelled with the other tribes of the Ghwária Khel and quitted the
Dorthern Qandahár territory to occupy the Láshura valley in Bajauf, some time previously



Dívána - Dod.
243
Diwána.The third oldest seot of the Sikhs. To Gurú Har Rai, or perhaps
to Gurú Rám Dás, must be ascribed the origin of the Díwána Sádhs
or “ Mad Saints," a name they owe chiefly to their addiction to ex-
cessive consumption of hemp drugs. Founded by Bálá. and Haria
with the Gurú’s permission the order is but loosely organised, and is
recruited mainly from the Játs and Ohamárs. lis members are for
the most part non-celibate. Outwardly these Sádh's keep the hair
uncut and wear a necklace of shells, with a peacock's feather in the
pagri. They follow the Adi Granth and repeat the true name.* Sikh
history relates that one of the sect who attempted forcible access to Gurú
Govind Singh was cut down by a sentry, whereupon Ghudda, their
spiritual guide, sent 50 men of the sect to assassinate him. But of these
48 turned back, and only two proceeded to the Gurú, without weapons,
and playing on & sarangi ; and instead of killing him they sang to him.
He gave them a square rupee as a memorial. (Macauliffe : Sikh Re-
ligion, V, p. 218). They are mainly returned from Kángra district.
Díwár, a family of Gadhioks, settled at Dalwal in Jhelum.
Dod, a Rájput tribe found in Hoshiarpur. The Dods are almost entirely
confined to the Bít tract in the Siwaliks, their head being the Rána
of Mánaswált. The Dods are Jaday or Chandr-bansi by origin. Tra-
dition avers that they once fought an enemy 1} times as numerous as
themselves, and so became called Deorha, whence Dod. The clan once
ruled in Orissa, whence Deo Chand fought bis way to Delhi, defeated
its rulers, the Túrs Túnwárs), and then conquered Jaijon :-
Orísa se charhiya Rája Deo Chand Baryáhan Tika ae.
Túr Rája auliyán jo thake fauj rachae,
Túr chhadde nathke jo mil baithe hai,
Dod Garh Muktesar men jo mile cháre tháon, --
* Rájá Doo Chand marched from Orissa. The Túr Rája collected a large army in order to
ineet him, but fled before him. The Dods occupied Garh Muktesar and the places round it.'
Thus Deo Chand came to Jaijon and ruled the Doába. His descend-
ant Jai Chand gave his name to Jaijon. The Dod Rájá was, however,
defeated by a Rájá of Jaswán, and his four sons separated, one taking
Jaijon, the second Kúngrat, the third Mánaswal Garhi and the fourth
Saroa. Jaijon and Saroa were subsequently lost to the Dods, and after
their defeat by Jaswán they sank to the status of ránus, losing that of
Rájás. Of the 22 villages dependent on Kúngrat, none pay talukdári
to the rána who is a mere co-proprietor in Kúngrat, as the family lost
its position during the Sikh rule. The Råna of Mánaswal, however,
maintained his position under the Sikhs and holds most of the 22
Mánaswál villages (Bít = 22) in jágír, his brothers holding the rest.
Another account runs thus:
Four leaders of the tribe migrated from Udaipur to Garh Mandál, 1,100 years ago, and
thence to Garh Muktasar. Thence Jodh Chand seized Mánaswál, expelling Hira, the Mábton
leader, whose tribe held the tract, 40 generations ago. Rána Chacho Chand, the 19th Rána,
was attacked by the Katoch ruler, but his brother Tilok Singh (Tillo) defeated hîm at
Mahúdpur in Una, and Tillo's shrine at Bhawani is reverenced to this day. In Sambat 1741
Rána Jog Chand repalled a Jaswal invasion. Rána Bakht Chand annexed Bhalán, with 12
dependent villages, in Una. His successor, Ratn Chand, repelled a Jaswál army under
* Maclagan, $ 101. The Diwana Sádhs appear to be a cect of the Malwa with head.
quarters at Pír-pind in
+ But the manj. Rájputs nave a baiya in Bít Mánaswál, according to Mr. Coldstream 'in
Punjab Notes and Queries I, $ 465.
arched from he Dods occupand ruled thood Rajá was, ne taking



244
Dodai-Dogar.
„Bhagwan Singh Sonkhla who was killed, and in his memory a shrine at Kharáli was
erected. A treaty now defined the Jaswal and Dod territories. Under Mián Guláb Singh,
regent during Acbal Chand's minority, Nádir Shah is said to have visited the tract and
ordered a massacre of the Rasáli people, but the Rána obtained from him a grant of Báthri,
then a Jaswál village. Råta Jhagar Chand, however, espoused the Jaswáls' cause, when
they were attacked by Sansár Chand of Kápg?a in 1804 A. D., and repulsed him. On
Ranjit Singh's invasion of the Nánaswal plateau, the Ráda was confirmed in his possessions,
subject to a contingent of 15 horse. The rule of inheritance was primogeniture, mitigated by
a system of lopping off villages as fiefs for younger sons, many of whose descendants still
hold villages, thus reducing the size of the estate.
The Dods are also found as a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural)
in Montgomery.
DODAI, once an important BALOCH tribe, but not now found under that
name. Its most important representatives are the Mirráni of Deras
Gházi and Ismail Khán, and Jhang, and the most important clans
of the Gurcháni.
Dodní, a Gaddi milkman, in Gujrát.
Dodi, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
DOGAR, fem. Dogarví.--The Dogars of the Punjab are found in the upper
valley of the Sutlej and Beás above the lower border of the Lahore
district, and have also spread westwards along the foot of the hills into
Sialkot. There are also considerable colonies of them in Hissar and
Karpál. The Dogars of Ferozepur, where they hold the riverside
almost exclusively from 20 miles below to 20 miles above the head-
quarters of that District, were thus described by Mr. Brandreth :-
“ In my account of the Ferozepur ilága I have already alluded to the
Dogars, who are supposed to be converted Chauhan* Rájputs from the
neighbourhood of Delhi. They migrated first to the neighbourhood of
Pák Pattan, whence they spread gradually along the banks of the
Sutlej, and entered the Ferozepur district about 100 years ago. The
Ferozepur Dogars are all descended from a common ancestor named
Bahlol, but they are called Mahu Dogars, from Mahu the grandfather
of Bahlol. Bahlol had three sons,t Bambu, Langar and Sammu. The
Dogars of Ferozepur and Mullanwala are the descendants of Bambu;
those of Khái the descendants of Langar; the descendants of Sammu
live in the Kasúr territory. There are many other sub-castes of the
Dogars in other districts along the banks of the Sutlej, as the Parchats,
the Topuras, the Chopuras, etc. The Chopura Dogars occupy Mamdot.I
Ferozepur Dogars consider themselves superier in rank and descent to
* Francis (Ferozepur Gazetteer, 1888-8, pp. 15-16) gives a full account of the Dogar
history in that District and on p. 56. be says that the Dogar claim to be Punwar, as weil as
Chauhan, and are probably a section of the great Bhatti trite and closely allied to the
NAIPÁL. The Manj traditions say that the Dogars are descended from Lumra (? fox) who,
like Naipál, was one of Rána Bhuti's 24 sons. They thrust aside the Wattus to the west
and the Naipáls to the east, and probably subdued the Machhis, Malláhs and other inferior
tribes, assuming the position of social superiors rather than that of actual cultivators, and
affecting the title of Sirdár.
+ Francis (Ferozepur Gazetteer, p.;56) gives a different account. He says that Mahu had
two sons Sahlol (whose descendants live on the Kasúr side of the Sutlej) and Bahlol
From Bahlol sprang four branches, Khamki, Phaimaki, Ullaki and Kandarki. The Phaimalı?
hold Khai and will not give daughters to other branches which they consider infericr.
Infanticide was formerly common amongst them.
| Francis says the sections mostly lorated in Mamdot are the Mattar, Chhini, Rupas
Dhandi and Khamma, as weil as the Chopra,



The Vogars.
245
the other sub-castes. They are very particular to whom they give
their daughters in marriage though they take wives from all the other
families. At one time infanticide is said to have prevailed among
them, but I do not think there is much trace of it at the present day.
“Sir Henry Lawrence, who knew the Dogars well, writes of them
that they are tall, handsome, and sinowy, and are remarkable for
having, almost without exception, large acquiline noses; they are
fanciful and violent, and tenacious of what they consider their rights,
though susceptible to kindness, and not wanting in courage; they
appear to have been always troublesome subjects, and too fond of their
owu free mode of life to willingly take service as soldiers. The Jewish
face which is found among the Dogars, and in which they resemble
the Afgháns, is very remarkable, and inakes it probable that there is
very little Chauhan blood in their veins, notwithstanding the fondness
with which they attempt to trace their connection with that ancient
family of Rájputs. Like the Gujars and Naipáls they are great thieves,
and prefer pasturing cattle to cultivating. Their favourite crime is
cattlo-stealing. There are, however, some respectable persons among
them, espeoially in the Ferozepur ilága. It is only within the last few
years that the priucipal Dogars have begun to wear any covering for
the head; formerly the whole population, as is the case with the poorer
classes still, wore their long hair over their shoulders without any
covering either of sheet or turban. Notwithstanding the difference of
physiognoiny, however, the Dogars preserve evident traces of some
counection with the Hindus in most of their family customs, in
which thoy reseinblo the Hindus much more than the orthodox
Muhammadars.”
Mr. Purser wrote that they are divided into two tribes, one of which
claims to be Chauhán and the other Punwár Rájputs, and he noted :
their alleged advent from Pák Pattan, but not their previous migra-
·tion from Delhi. If they ever did move from Delhi to the Montgomery
district, it can hardly have been since the Ghaggar ceased to fertilize
the intervening couutry, and the date of the migration must have been
at least some centuries back; and the Dogars of Hissár came to those
parts from the Punjab, probably from the Sutlej across the Sirsa
district. The Dogars of Lahore and Ferozepur are essentially a
riverside tribe, being found only on the river banks: they bear the
very worst reputation, and appear from the passage quoted above to
have retained till lately some at least of the habits of a wild tribe.
Their origin was probably in the Sutlej valley. They appear to have
entered the Ferozepur district about 1760 A.D., and during the next
forty years to have possessed themselves of a very considerable portion
of the district, while their turbulence rendered them almost independ-
ent of the Sikh Government. In 1808 we recogvised the Dogar
State of Ferozepur, and took it under our protection against Ranjit
Singh ; but it lapsed in 1835.
The Rájput origin of the Dogars is probably very doubtful, and is
strenuously denied by their Rájput neighbours, though Sir Denzil
Ibbetson believed that Dogar, or perhaps Doghar,* is used in some
bearia
21e theirssed the port 177.4alley, babits quoted
* Doghaſ means two waterpots, one carried on top of the other. The d is soft. In Dogar
it is hard.



246
Dogli-Dohli.
parts of the Province to denote one of mixed blood. Another derivation
of the name is doghgar or milkman.* The Dogars seem to be originally
a pastoral rather than an agricultural tribe, and still to retain a strong
liking for cattle, whether their own or other people's. They are often
classed with Gújars, whom they much resemble in their habits. In
Karnal, Lahore and Ferozepur they are notorious cattle-thieves, but
further north they seem to have settled down and become peaceful
husbandmen. They are not good cultivators. Their social standing
seems to be about that of a low-class Rájput, but in Sirsa they rank as
a good agricultural caste, of equal standing with the Waţtús. They are
practically all Musalmáns, but in Karnál their women still wear the
Hindu petticoat; and in marriage the mother's got is excluded. In
Jullundur they marry late, and are said to have marriage songs
uvintelligible to other tribes. Some of the largest Dogar clans are
the Mattar, Chína, Tagra, Mahụ and Chokra.
According to an account obtained from Kapurthala the Dogars were
originally settled at Lakhiwál, near which was fought a battle between
the Manj and Bhatti Rajputs, the Dogars siding with the latter. The
Manj were, however, victorious and expelled the Dogars from Lakhiwal,
but for generations no Dogar would drink from the hands of a Manj.
The Dogar septs in Kapúrthala are:-Dasal, from Lakhiwál: founded.
Dasal which was destroyed by the Sikhs, who had been plundered by
the Dogars in their flight from Ahmad Shah Abdali; Bájwa, or Ratrá,
from Sunáru; Ripál, Nainah, Mattar, Asar all from Lakhiwál.
Other gots are the Sídhi, Banch, Dáre, Chhane, Khame, Mabhi, Mahú,
Dadúd, Ďhandí, Gug, Dher, Tote, Kohli, Pade, Sanápi, Jakhrá, Katwal,
Cbhohar, Chopri, Ghangi, Wali, Wisar, Khari, Sombar, Ilsar, Johde.
Kotordal, Gosal, Saurai, Dhaurái and Gamload.
In Montgomery the Dogar - Khíwa, -Mabu and -Mittar rank as three
agricultural Rájput clans.
Dogli. A term applied to the offspring of a Rájput man by á Gaddi woman
in Kángļa. Cf. Dogalá, a mongrel. (The d is soft).
DOGBá, a term applied to any inhabitant of the Dugar des,t whatever his
caste, but more especially to the Hindu Rájputs of that region. Brah-
mans also are included in the term, as are Ráthis and Thakkurs (as
Rajputs), but not Ghirths or Kanets. I
According to Drew (Jammu and Kashmir Territories, pp. 43 et seq.)
there are two lakes near Jammu, the Saroin Sar and Mán Sar, and the
country between them was called in Sanskrit Drigarhdesh or the
country between the two bollows. This was corrupted into Dugar.
Drew divides the Dogras of the Jammu hills into Brahmans, Rajputs
(including the Miáns and working Rájputs), Khatris, Thákars, Játs,
Banyás and K(i;rárs (petty shopkeepers), Náis, Jíúrs (carriers), Dhiyárs
(iron-smelters), Meghs and Dúms.
DOALI, a drummer (player on dol) in Gujrát.
In Hissár the Dogars have a vague tradition that they camefrom the hill called Dogar in
Jammu.
Des bere does not appear to mean 'plain,' but simply tract.
Soo Bingley's Dogras (Class Band-books for the Indian Army, 1899),
Drew (Jan Jammu led in his was CPO Brahm hákars, hipers



247
Baptar (Pers. daftane similarity of mökis are little brot Dan
Dapthis fact satirist Fanse horreveie
Dolat-Drigs.
DOLAT, DULHAT, a clan of Játs found in Nábha, Pațiála and Ferozepore.* Rai
Khanda, their ancestor, is said to have held a jágir near Delhi. His
brothers Ragbír and Jagobír were killed in Nadir Shah's invasion, but
he escaped and fled to Siúna Gujariwálá, a village, pow in ruins, close
to Sunám, and then the capital of a petty state. He sank to Ját status
by marrying his brother's widows. The origin of the name Dolat is
thus accounted for. Their ancestor's children did not live, so his wife
made a vow at Naina Deví to visit the shrine twice for the tonsure
ceremony of her son, if she had one. Her son was accordingly called
Do-lat (from lat hair).
DOLAT, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Dom, DOMB, fem. dombání, Bal., a bard, minstrel ; see Dúm. In Dera Gházi
Khán the doms or mírásis are a low class of Muhammadans who used
to keep horse-stallions and still do so in the Bozdár hills.
DOMARAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán...
Dombkí, Domkí.-Described in ballads as the greatest house among the
Baloch,' and of admittedly high rank, the Domkí are still called the
Daptar (Pers. daftar) or recorders of BALOCH genealogy. But owing
to this fact and the similarity of name some accuse them of being
Doms, and a satirist says: "The Dombkís are little brothers of the
Doms. The name is however probably derived from Dambak, a
river in Persia. Their present head-quarters are at Lahrí in Kachhi.
Domrá, a young bard: a term of contempt, but see Dúmrå.
Dosálí, a small caste found in Hoshiarpur, but not east of the Sutlej.t.
Its members make dishes of leaves, often of tawar leaves for Hindus
to eat of. At weddings their services are in great request to make
leaf platters, and that appears to be their principal occupation. They
sew the leaves together with minute pieces of dried grass straw,
as is done in the Simla Hills by Dúmnas. The Dosálí is deemed an
impure caste, and Rajputs, etc., cannot drink from their hands. But
it is deemed higher than the Sarera, or the Bhanjrá, but below the Bahti
or Ghirth, and near the Chhímba. The Dosali rarely or never marries
outside his own caste.
DOTANNI, see Dautanni
DOTOEN, see Thákur.
Doye, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
DRAKHAN, Bal., a carpenter: contrast drashk, a tree.
DREN, see Mallah.
DRIGS, a tribe of Játs found along the Chenab in Multán. They attribute
their origin to Kech Makrán and were probably driven out of Sind late
in the 15th century settling in Bet Kech in Akbar's time. They are
entitled Jám.
C
* But their Sidh and Pir is Didár Si:igh, whose shrine is at Mard Khera in Jind.
† Ibbetson indeed describes the Dosáli as a hill caste, somewhat above the Chamár, or
rather as an ocoupational group, deriving its name from dusa, the small piece of straw
used to pin leaves together. But the Dosálís are also found in Amritsar where they have a
tradition that their forebear used to carry a lantern before the emperor, whence he was.
called Missáli. This menjal task led to his excommunication, and the name was corrupted
into Dosáli.



248
Drishak-Drugpa.
Dkísbak, are the most scattered of all the BALOCH tumans of Dera Ghazi Khán,
many of their villages lying among a Ját population on the bank of the
Indus; and this fact renders the tuman less powerful than it should be
from its numbers. They hold no portion of the hills, and are practically
confined to the Gházi district, lying scattered about between the
Pitok Pass on the north and Sori Pass on the south The tribe
belongs to the Rind section ; but claims descent from Hot, son of
Jalal Khán. Its sections are the Kirmani, Mingwáni, Gulpádh,
Sargáni, Arbáni, Jistkáni and Isanáni, the chief belonging to the
first of these. Their head-quarters are at Asni close to Rájanpur.
They are said to have descended into the plains after the Mazári, or
They at the end of the land
A Buddhistoriese inct, the Drugethul as
Rinpoche y Pedappear tom7st order.
DRUGPA, red-cap' (but see below).--A Buddhist order. Like its sister order
the NINGMAPA, from whom they appear to be distinct, the Drugpa was
founded about 750 A. D. by Padamsambhava, who is known in Láhul as
Gurú' or Gurú Rinpoche, Padam sambhava visited Mandi, Ganotara,
Láhul, Kashmir and both the Bangáhale, but died in Great Tibet.* One
of his great doctrines was called Spiti Yoga, and he may have developed
it in Spiti. A sorcerer and exorcist, he helped to degrade the faith by the
most debased Tantraism, but he merits admiration as a great traveller,
The name Drugpa possibly means, according to Mr. Francke, the
Bhutia order, the Tibetan for Bhután being Drukyül or Drugyül and for
a Bhutia 'Drugpа.' The Bhután church is governed by a very great
Láma, who is almost a l'ope in himself.f In Spiti his title is given as
Dorji Chang, but in Ladákh he is known as N(g)a(k) wang Namgiál.
The Bhután Láma appears to rule the following religious houses in
Western Tibet :-
(i) Dariphug and
ix) Ganphug,
(ii) Zatulphug io the holy cir- (s) Gesar and Sumor in the
cuit of Kailas,
Daba dzong. According to
(iii) Jakbyeb in Take Mána-
a Spiti manepa (preacher)
sarowar,
his lieutenant in Tibet is
(iv) Khojarnáth,
known as the Gangri
Rungkhung and
Durindzin, or Gyalshokpat
(vi) Do. in the Upper Karpáli
and his influence is widely
river,
spread. He is or should
(vii) Garrdzong, near Gartok,
be appointed for a term of
(viii) Iti.
three years.
In Láhul there are two distinct sects of the Drugpas :-
1. The Zhang Drugpas (Middle Bluteas) or Kargiutpa (Tantraists).
This sect bas 3 Lábula communities all connected with the parent com-
munity at Hemis : only one Láhula house boasts an abbot (khripa),
[pronounced thripa] and he is appointed by the abbot of Hemis. The
head monastery is at Dechen Choskor near Lhassa.
* Padamsambhava was an Indian monk who became a great friend of the Tibetan emperor
Khrising bte btsau (pron. Treshing detsam), who extended bis empire from the Chinese
frontier to Gilgit.
t Sherring describes the curioas Biatea administration which rules one of the most
sacred regions. of Tibet independently, and sometimes in defiance of the Lhassa authorities ;
Western Tibet, p. 278.;
$ Dashok, according to Sherring, op. cit., and the Rangr Donján of the Gazetteer of
the Kángra District, Part II.



Dubira Dúm.
24y
But the Zhan Dragpas acknowledge the suzerainty of the pope or
Dalai Láma of Bhután, and in December 1909 the abbot of Hemis
Skoshok Stag Tsang Ras Chen passed through Kullu to attend the
2. Alondon Láina's court. hen passed through the abbot.cope or
of cell,
le of stage order to an
2. Hlondrugpa, pronounced Lodrugpa (the Southern Bhuteas). There
are no less than twelve houses of this order. All are subordinate to
Stagna (pron. Takna) in Ladákh and that house again is subordinate to
Bhután. The abbot of Stagna appoints the abbot of the ancient house
of Gurú Ghuntál or Gandhola which was founded by Gurú Rinpoche
himself, and the Gandhola abbot appoints the other Lahula abbots of
the order. He sends an annual tribute of Rs. 30 to Gangri Durindzin
through the abbot of Stagna. The Drugpas of Láhúl thus keep up their
connection with Bhután. Orders appointing or relieving an abbot are
supposed to be signed in Bhután, and when the ritual dancing at
Krashis (Tashi) Dongltse (at Kyelong) was revised a brother was sent
to Bhután to learn the proper steps, instead of to the much less distant
Drugpа monastery at Hemis in Ladákh.*
Like the Ninginapas the Drugpas are distinguished for their low
moral standard and degraded superstitions which are little better
than devil-worship. The brethren are allowed to marry and their
children (buzhan or naked boys ') let their hair grow till they
enter the community.
Dobír, a weighman, in Muzaffargarh.
Duhlar, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
DUKPÁ, LO-DUKPÁ, the Buddhist sect to which all the monks in Láhúl and
the monks of the Pín monastery in Spiti belong. Its peculiarity is that
Do vow of celibacy is required of, or observed by, its members, who
marry and have their wives living with them in the monasteries. The
sect wears red garments and is subject to the Dharma Raja of Bhután,
in which country it is most numerously represented. The Nyingmá is
the sub-division of the Dukpá sect to which the monks of Pin and
the families from which they are drawn belong. The word merely
means 'ancient,' and they appear to have no distinguishing doctrines.
(Apparently the same as the Nyimapa sect of § 252 of Census Report,
1881). But see Drugpa and Ningmapa from Mr. Francke's accounts
of those orders
Dúm, or less correctly Dom : fem. Dúmni, dim. Dúmrá. According to Ibbetson
the Dúm is to be carefully distinguished from the Dom or Domra, the
executionor and corpse-burner of Hindustán, who is called Dúmná in the
hills of Hoshiarpur and Kángļa. But in Chamba tbe Dumná is called
Dúm and in the Hill States about Simla he is a worker in bamboo.
According to Ibbetson the Dúm of the plains is identical with the
Mírásí, the latter being the Muhammadan, Arabic name for the Hindú :
and Indian Dúm. But though tbe Dúms may overlap the Mírásís
* It is not, however, certain that all Drugpas are subject to Bhután. Hamsay gives a
separate sect called Hlondukpa (Hlo meaning Bhután) which includes the Stagnes
house. It was founded, he says, in the 15th century by N(g)a(k) wang Namgial: Dictw.
of Western Tibet, Lahore, 1890, p. 83. Possibly there was a reformation from Bhután in
the 15th century.
† In Maya Singh's Punjábi Dicty. S Dúmná is said to a species of bee.



250
Dat Dimmi.
Bote bago the Dolaya tbåms ar ply thing is the eastes bhäneen the ter
and be in common parlance confused with them, they appear to be, in
some parts of the Punjab at least, distinct from them, and the Mírásís
are beyond all question inextricably fused with the Bháts. In
Gurgaon the Dúm is said to be identical with the Kanchan, and to be
a Mírásí who plays the tabla or sarangi for prostitutes, who are often
Mírási girls. Such Dúms are also called bharwa (pimp) or sufardai.
Dúm women as well as men ply this trade. But another account from
the same District says that the Dúm is the, mírási of the Mírásís; and
that he gets his almos from the menial castes, such as the Jhíwar,
Dakaut, Koli, Chamár, Bhangi, Juláhá and Dhának. In Lahore too
they are described as quite beyond the Mírási pale, as the true Mírásís
will not intermarry with them nor will prostitutes associate with them,
though, like the Bhands,* they sing and play for them when they dance
or sing professionally. In fact they rank below the Chuhțá. So too
in Ludhiana they are distinct from and lower than the Mírási.
In Dera Gházi Khán the Dúm or Langá are said to be an occupa-
tional group of the Mírásís, and to be the mírási of the Baloch tribes.
In other words they are identical with the Dom or Domb, whose name
means minstrel in Balochi.
DÚrná. The Dúmpá, called also Domra, and even Dúm in Chamba, is the
Chúhrá of the hills proper, and is also found in large numbers in the
sub-montane tracts of Kángra, Hoshiarpur and Gurdáspur. Like the
Chúhrá of the plains be is something more than a scavenger; bat
whereas the Chúbra works chiefly in grass, the Dúmna adds to this
occupation the trade of working in bamboo, a material not available
to the Chúhrá. He makes sieves, winnowing pans, fans, matting, grass
rope and string, and generally all the vessels, baskets, screens, furniture
and other articles which are ordinarily made of bamboo. When he con-
fines himself to this sort of work and gives up scavengering, he appears
to be called Bhanjra, at any rate in the lower hills, and occasionally
Sariál. The Dúmna appears hardly ever to become Musalmán or Sikh,
and is classed as Hindu, though being an outcast he is not allowed
to draw water from wells used by the ordinary Hindu population.
The Dúmná is often called Dum in other parts of India, as in Chamba ;
and is regarded by Hindus as the type of uncleanness. Yet he seems
once to have enjoyed as a separate aboriginal race some power and
importance. Further information regarding him will be found in
Sherring (I, 400) and Elliott (I, 84). He is, Sir Denzil Ibbetson con-
sidered, quite distinct from the Dum-Mírási.
Donná, a low sweeper caste, also called Bhanjrá, in the hills and in Gurdas.
pur, Jullundur and Hoshiarpur. They make chiks, baskets, etc., of
bamboo and do menial service. Apparently the term is a generic one,
including Barwálás, Batwáls, Daolis and Sansois. But in Lahore, where
the Dumná is also found, he is described as distinct from the Batwal,
and as a Hindu who is yet not allowed to draw water from Hindu wells.
Some of the Dúmnás will eat from a Muhammadan's hands. Their
clans are Kalotra, Manglu, Pargat, Drahe and Lalotra. The word is
probably only a variant of Dúm.
* The Dúm ranks below the Bhánd also. The latter are skilled in bhandár a practise of
which the Dúm is ignorant. It consists in absorbing all the water in a large bath and
ejecting it through the ears, nostrils or mouth.



Dúmrå~Dutanni.
251
DÚMŘÁ, Domká, dim. of Dúm, q. v. In the hills the term is applied to any
low caste wbich works as tailors, masons or carpenters, or in bamboo.
Dón, a tribe of Játs, found in Jínd, and so called from duhná, to milk, be
cause they used to milk she-buffaloes.
Dund Rai, a tribe of Játs which claims Solar Rájput origin through its
eponym who settled in the Mánjha and his descendant Hari who
migrated to Siálkot.
Durrání, see Abdálí.
Dosáda, Dosád, a Púrbia tribe of Chamárs. They are the thieves and
burglars of Behár where also the chaukidárs have been drawn from
this class from time immemorial.
DUSANJ, a Hindu Ját tribe found in Ferozepur, whom tradition avers that
Saroia, Ját, had five sons, Sángha, Mallhi, Dhindsa, Dhillon and Dusanj,
eponyms of as many gots.
Duranní, see Dautanní.



253
FAIZULLAPORIA, the sixth of the Sikh misls or confederacies, which was
recruited from Játs.
FAQARTÁDARÍ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
FAQÍR, pl. FUQARÁ, 'poor,' a mendicant (Arabic). The term faqir compre-
hends at least two, if not three, very different classes, exclusive of the
religious orders pure and simple. Many of these are of the highest
respectability; the members are generally collected in monasteries or
shrines where they live quiet. peaceful lives, keeping open house to
travellers, training their neophytes, and exercising a wholesome indlu-
ence upon the people of the neighbourhood. Such are many at least
of the BAIRÁGIS and GosáINS. Some of the orders do not keep up
regular monasteries, but travel about begging and visiting their
disciples; though even here they generally bave permanent head-
quarters in some village, or at some shrine or temple where one of their
order officiates. So too the monasterial orders travel about among
their disciples and collect the offerings upon which they partly subsist.
There is an immense number of these men whose influence is almost
wholly for good. Some few of the orders are professedly celibate,
though even among them the rule is seldom strictly observed; but most
of the Hindu orders are divided into the Sanyogi and Viyogi sections
of which the latter only takes vows of celibacy, while among the Musal-
mán orders celibacy is seldom even professed. Such, however, as live
in monasteries are generally, if not always, celibate. The professed
ascetics are called Sádhs if Hindu, and Pírs if Musalmán. The Hindus
at any rate have their neophytes who are undergoing probation before
admission into the order, and these men are called chela. But besides
these both Hindu and Musalmán ascetics have their disciples, known
respectively as sewak and murid, and these latter belong to the order
as much as do their spiritual guides; that is to say, a Káyath clerk
may be a BAIRÁGI or a Pathán soldier a CAISATI, if they have committed
their spiritual direction respectively to a Bairagi guru and Chishti pír.
But the Muhammadan Chishti, like the Hindu Bairagi or Gosáin, may
in time form almost a distinct caste. Many of the members of these
orders are pious, respectable men whose influence is wholly for good.
But this is far from being the case with all the orders. Many of them
are notoriously profligate debaucbers, who wander about the country
seducing women, extorting alms by the threat of curses, and relying
on their saintly character for protection. Still even these men are
members of an order which they bave deliberately entered, and have
some right to the title which they bear. But a very large portion of
the class who are included under the name Faqir are ignorant men of
low caste, without any acquaintance with even the general outlines of
the religion they profess, still less with the special tenets of any parti-
cular seet, who borrow the garb of the regular orders and wander
about the country living on the alms of the credulous, often hardly
knowing the names of the orders to which the external signs they wear
would show them to belong. Such men are more beggars, not ascetics;
and their numbers are unfortunately large. Besides the occupations
described above, the Faqir class generally have in their hands the



254
Faqir miskin
Firdúsí.
custody of petty shrines, the menial service of village temples and
mosques, the guardianship of cemeteries, and similar semi-religious
ofices. For these services they often receive small grants of land
from the village, by cultivating which they supplement the alms and
offerings they receive.
The subject of the religious orders of the Hindus is one of the greatest
complexity ; the cross-divisions between, and the different meanings of,
such words as Jogi, SANIÁSI and Sádu are endless. See also Bharai,
Chajjupanthi, Dádupanthi, Jogi, Saniási, Udási, etc., etc.
FAQIR MISKÍN, see under Chitrali.
FAQRÁKH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
FABUKA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Fattiáná, one of the principal branches of the Siáls of Jhang.
FEROZKE, a Kbarral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
FIRDÚBIÁN, a sect or order of the SÚFIS, founded by Shaikh Najm-ud-Din
Firdús,



255
GABARE, Gaware (also called Mahron, from their principal village), a group
of some 300 families found in certain villages of the Kohi tract in the
Indus Kohistán. They speak a dialect called Gowro and have a tradi.
tion that they originally came from Rásbung in Swát.--Biddulph's
Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh, p. 10.
GABHAL, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
GABÍR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GABR, or, as they call themselves Narisati,* a small tribe found in a few
villages in Chitral. Possibly the Gabrak of Bábar's Memoirs, their
language differs cunsiderably from that of the Gabare of the Indus
valley. The Chitralis speak of them as a bald race, and they certainly
have scanty beards. Sir G. Robertson describes them as all Musal.
máns of the Sunni sect, who have a particular language of their own
and are believed to have been anciently fire-worshippers.
The Gabr has no very distinctive appearance except that one
occasionally sees a face like that of a pantomime Jew. There are one
or two fair-visaged, well-looking men belonging to the better class,
who would compare on equal terms with the similar class in Chitral :
they, however, are the exception,
The remainder, both high and low, seem no better than the poor
cultivator class in other parts of the Mehtar's dominions, and have a
singularly furtive and mean look and manner. The women have a
much better appearance. They dress in loose blue garments, which
fall naturally into graceful folds. The head is covered with a blue
skull-cap from which escape long plaits of hair, one over each shoulder,
and two hanging down behind. White metal or bead neck and wrist
ornaments contrast well with the dark blue material of their clothes.
At a short distance these women are pleasing and picturesque.
The Ramgul Kafirs are alsn spoken of as Gabars or Gabarik, but
they have no relationship with the Gabr.
GADÁRAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Gápaní, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
GADARIA, the shepherd and goatherd of Hindústán. Almost confined to the
Jumna zone in the Punjab, the Gadaria has, even in that part of the
Province, almost ceased to be distiuctively a shopherd, as the
cultivating classes themselves often pasture their own flocks, and has
become rather a blanket weaver, being indeed as often called Kambalia
as Gadaria. The Gadarias are Hindu almost without exception.
GADDí, Gádí.-(1) The Muhammadan Gaddís of Delhi, Karpál and Ambala
are a tribe found apparently in the upper doáb of the Jumna and Ganges.
Closely resembling the GHOSI, they are perhaps like him & sub-division
or offshoot of the Ahírs,t and are by hereditary occupation milkmen,
i the dark blue and picturesque.harik, but
* Fr. Nurgat, one of the 80-called Gabr villages in the Kunár valley. It is also oalled
Birkot, and by the Káfira Satrgrán, Nursnt being its Chitráli namo.The Ráfirs of the
Hindoo-Koosh, p. 265.
† There is also a Gaddi tribe among the sainis.



256
The Hill Gaddis.
bat in Karnál, where they are most numerous, they have settled down
as cultivators and own several villages, though they are poor husband.
men. (2) The Hindu Gaddís of Chamba and Kángra are billmon,
Like the Kanets, Meos and other congeries of tribes they are com-
posed of several elements. Indigenous to the Brahmaur wizárat of the
Chamba State they have spread southward across the Dhaula Dhár into
the northern part of Kángra Proper, and they give their name to the
Gaderan, a tract of mountainous country with ill-defined boundaries
lying on both sides of the Dhaula Dhár, and their speech is called
Gádi.
In Chamba they number 11,507 souls, but these figures do not include
the Brahman and Rájput sections which returu themselves under their
caste names. The majority are Khatrís.
The Gaddís are divided into four classes : (i) Brahmans, (ii) Khatrís
and Rájputs who regularly wear the sacred thread, (iii) Thákurs and
Ráthís who, as a rule, do not wear it, and (iv) a menial or dependant
class, comprising Kolís, Rihárás,* Lohárs, Bádhís, Sipís and Hálís,
to whom the title of Gaddi is incorrectly applied by outsiders as inhabit.
ants of the Gaderan, though the true Gaddía do not acknowledge them
as Gaddís at all.
Each class is divided into numerous gotras or exogamous sections,
but the classes themselves are not, strictly speaking, exogamous. Thus
the Jhúnún gotar of the Khatrís intermarries with (? gives daughters
to the Brahmans; and the Brahmans of Kukti regularly intermarry
with the other groups. Similarly the janeo-wearing families do not
object to intermarriage with those which do not wear it, and are even
said to give them daughters (menials of course excepted). +
In brief, Gaddi society is organised on the Rájpút hypergamous
system.
The Gaddís have traditions which ascribe their origin to immigration
from the plains. Thus the Chauhan Rajputs and Brahman Gaddís
accompanied Rájá Ajia Varma to Chamba in 850-70 A. D., while the
Churá hán, Harkhan, Pakbru, Chiledi, Manglu and Kuudail Rájputs
and the Khatrís are said to have fled to its hills to escape Aurangzeb's
persecutions. These traditions are not irreconcilable with the story that
Brahmaur, the ancient Brahmapura, is the home of the Gaddís ; for
doubtless the nucleus of their confederation had its seats in the Dhaula
Dhár, in wbich range Hindus have from time to time sought au asylum
from war and persecution in the plains.
The Brahman, Rájput, Khatri, Thákur and Ráthi“ sections alike
preserve the Brahminical gotra of their original tribe. But these
gotras are now sub-divided into countless als or septs which are appa-
rently also styled gotras. Thus among the Brahmans we find the Bhats
from the Bhayțiyát wizárat of Chamba, and Ghungaintu (ghungha,
dumb), both als of the Kaundal gotra. The Brahman sept-names
disclose none of those found among the Sársut Brahmans of the Punjab
* A small caste or group of meniáls, employed as navvies. See footnote on page 259
below.
+ It is indeed stated that no distinction is now made between families which do, and those
which do not, wear the janeo ; but in former times the Rájás used to confer the janec on
Páthis in return for presents and services--and so some of them wear it to this day.



Gaddi al names.
257
plains, so completely do the Gaddi Brahmans seem to havo become
identified with the Gaddi system. Many of the als bear obvious
nick-pames, such as Chadbu, cross-legged ; * Dundú, onehand-
ed ; † Tanjú and Tandețú, cat's-eyed ; 1 Bhangrețú, squinter; $
Chutánbru, debauchee ; || Ghunain, one who speaks through his nose ; 1
Jukku, gambier ; ** Marántú, one who fled to the plains to escape
cholera, mari ; Jirgh, dumb; tt Nansain, adopted by a náni or grand-
mother ; Sasi, one who lived with his nother-in-law. Litkar, lame; 11
Other nameter ; $$ Chupetú, retisanother-in-law.
Other names denote occupations not by any means Brahminical:
Sundheta, seller of assafoetida (sundha) ; Palihan, sharpener ;|||| Bardan,
archer; 1 Sáhdhráptu, once a sáh or wealthy man who became bank-
rupt (dharanti); Sipain ú, tenant of a Sipi menial; Ranetu, a Ráná's
tenant; Adhkáru, a physician who left his patients uncured (adh, half :
karu, doer) ; Saunpolú, seller of saunf, aniseed; Langhe, ferryman;
Jogi ; Lade, a trader to Ladakh ; Khuthlu, kuth-seller ; Jhudnu,
idler ; *** Phangtain, dealer in phamb, wool.
Totemism does not exist, unless Guarete, 'born in a guár or cowshed,'
and Sunbunu, from one who had a sunnú tree in front of his house,
could be regarded as totemistic sections.
In Kángra one got-Paunkhnú-is said to provide purohits for all the
other Brahman Gaddis. The Brahmans in Kángra, it is said, inter- , .
marry with the Jhúnú got of the Gaddi Khatrís.
Amosg the Rájputs we find the Ordián, ill-wishers': fit Ranyán,
'squinters' fff and Misán, 'pig.nosed'; $$$ all als of the Bachar gotar :
Kurralu, 'brown-haired, ' ||||li and Dinrán, black,'TTS uls of the Dewal
and Uttam gotars respectively. Very doubtful instances of totemism are
Phazán bran ( phak) eater' (Bhardwaj) ; Khuddú, eater of parched
maize' (Sunkhyál); Ghokpu,' shooter of doves '-ghug (Dewal); Rikhán-
tu, 'bear-killer' (Atar); Chaker, purveyor of chikor to the Rájás
(Ambak); Kadán, sower of kadu or pumpkios' (Bhardwaj); Pakhru
.bird-shootor' (Bisistpál).
A few als refer to occupations ; Charu, fr. chár, - headman' (Bhar.
duári); Garhaigu, 'keeper of a stronghold,' garh (Atar); Baidu,
physician' (Rondal) ; Makrátu, 'boxer' ;**** Ghingain, 'seller of
ghi.
Others again are fanciful: Tharrotu, from an ancestor who threat-
ened to drag his adversary before the thara or court at Chamba;
Dakiyán, from one who used to dance with dáki n, Háli, women: or
uncomplimentary, e.g., Kholu, greedy ; Jhurjáu, idle ; Rohaila, noisy ;
Jhibián, mad; Chutrainya, debauchee; Mukhrán, stammerer; Gulrán,
liar; Juár, liar; Kubainta, lunch-back; Kavgru, scold, Jhirrú,
(Ambak); Kedir (Atar); Chakooter of doves man
* Fr. chudda, buttocks : cf. chadha, 1
sedentary,' also an al name.
of Fr. dundá, one who has lost a hand.
Fr. tandá, cat's-eyed.
$ Fr. bhingra, squint.
ll Fr. chut, debauchee.
Fr. gunna, speaking through the nose.
** Fr. juá, gambling.
tt Fr. firingar, dumb,
If Fr. latta, lame.
&$ Fr. tíriá, squint.
Uli Fr. palná, to sharpen.
T4 Fr. bari, arrow
*** Fr. jhúrnci, to idle or to meditate,
tt Fr. orda, evil.
11 Fr. rinu, a squint.
$$$ Fr. misa, snout.
lill || Fr. kerra, brown.
TTT Fr, diwna, black.
**** Fr. muka, fist.



258
Gaddi totems.
tease ; Amlaitu, opium-eater; Dharambar, pock-marked. In Kangra
the Agásni got of Řájput Gaddis is said to be really an offshoot of the
Jariál Rajputs.
Among the Khatrís, no trace exists of the section-names current in
the plains. We find occupational names : Sáhnú, shopkeeper (sáh) ;
Padhotarú, from one who lived on a plain (padar); Rusahri, cook ;
Charhain, climber; Nakletú, mimic ; Sundhú, dealer in assafoetida ;
Bangete, a physician who powdered zinc (bang); Mogu, dealer in coral ;
Dhanchu, fr. one who lived with his flocks (dhan) ; Panjaru, wool.
comber; Gharáți, water-miller : with two inexplicable names; Drudhain,
one who recovers stolen millet from mouses' holes; and Druhru, one who
so recovers walnuts-fr. drudh, druhri, a mouse's hole! Other Khatri
als (so-called gots) in Kúngļa are : Bhundu, Bhakhu, Badán, Bhatelu,
Bihán, Bihántú, Chadlu, Chaledi, Chapetu, Chugainu, Dagrán, Galoti,
Korári, Jhurain, Phátu, Magletu, Rahlu, Sálnu, Sundhu, Targain,
Thakleq, Thosaru, and Thakru. None of these names are found among
the Khatris of the plains, as Barnes appears to have been informed.
But just as among the Brahmans of the hills, e. g. in Chamba, we find
the ancient gotras broken up into countless als, so too among the Gaddi
Khatrís it may well be that the old sub-divisions have been forgotten
among the crowd of al names. Other als found in Chamba follow.
Traces of totemism can hardly be said to exist in Gohaina, killer of a
lizard (goh.); Bersain, one who fetched ber trees for his flocks'; Potu,
one who ate sheep's entrails (pota); Thapliag, one who ate wheat-cakes
(thoplu); Sarwán, planter of a cypress (Pers. sarú !); Phakolu, ono
who was poor and ate phak, 'husks.'
One or two curious names are:-Sanglú, carrier of a sacred chain
(sangal); Sanjúán, maker of offerivgs (sanj); Mangnesu, beggar.
Mere nicknames are Kalsain, Kaleţu and Kalári, 'black'; Lateti,
lame; Phingaletu, crippled, * Kiári,t blind; Ghusu, I boxer, Tata ngrug
and Kachingar, dumb.
Among the Ráthís the als would seem in a few cases to be really
totemistic : Marálotar, 'born under a marál tree,' the ulmus Walli.
chiana. Sinuri, born while it was snowing'; Salbainu, born while
locusts were at Bugti'; Ráute, 'born under a rai or silver fir';
Jotain, born in the Surai pass, jot.
Most of the names are however merely picknames, e.g., Jamuhan,
clumsy (jam); Tanán, deaf; Dhageta, cragsman; Dapher, lazy, etc.
Some are derived from events, e. g., Harokar, said to mean ony ostra-
cised for slaying a brother by his blood-kin (har, bone).
Religious names also occur: Japaintu, from jap, repetition : Fagir,
beggar; Jogíán, from a jogi ancestor.
Occupational names are: Phakru, maker of combs for cleaning wool,
Ghoru (royal) groom; Ghuletu, wrestler; Bhájretu,ll porter; Gáhri,
Alpine grazier; Adápi, collector of blankets (dúp) in which part of the
revenue was raid ; Lunesar, salt-dealer; Káhngherú, trader in combs
(kinghú); Palnu, sharpener of sickles.
WIU
T of Bhájretu which parte comb
* Fr. phingola, cripple,
+ Fr. kána, blind,
Fr. guthú, fist.
$ Fr. tnttá, dumb.
|| Fr. bhára, load.
Fr. palna, to sharpen.



Gaddi dress.
359
In Bángra the Ráthi als are said to be Barjati, Kulai, Gharáti (a
Khatri al in Chamba), and Sakhotru. The Rájás used to confer the
janeo on Ráthis in return for presents and services, and this is why some
of them still wear it.
Among the Thakkurs of Kángļa are the Baráú, Harelu, Janwar,
Marthán and Siúri als. Other als whose members do not wear the janeo
(and are therefore presumably Thakkur too) are the Baghretu, Ghári,
Tutári and Ugharetu.
The Gaddís are an interesting people, and offer a striking contrast in
several respects to the other inhabitants of Chamba. The costume of
the Gaddis, both men and women, is characteristic and striking. The
old head-dress of the men is of a peculiar shape, with a flap roond the '.
margin, and a peak-like projection in the centre, said to represent the
Kailas of Mani Mahes. The flap is tied up for ordinary wear, but let
down over the ears and neck in time of inoarning, as well as in severe
weather. The front is often adorned with dried flowers or beads.
But this head-dress is falling into disuse, save on special occasions
its place being taken by tbe pagri. On the body a pattú coat
called chola, reaching below the knee, is woru. It has a deep collar,
which hangs loose in two lappets in front, and in the sewing the
wearer stows away various articles, such as a needle and thread, pieces
of paper and twine. The chola is tightoned round the waist by a black
rope worn as a waist-band. This is made of sheep's wool and is called
dora. Above the waist-band the coat is loose, and in this receptacle
the Gaddi carries many of his belongings. On the march a shepherd
may have four or five lambs stowed away in his bosom, along with his
daily food and other articles. The legs are generally bare, but many
wear pattú paijámas, loose to the knees for the sake of freedom in
walking, but fitting tight round the calf and ankle where it rests in
numerous folds. Shoes are in common use. From the girdle hang a
knife, a flint box and steel and a small leather bag, in which the wearer
carries money and other small articles. The hill people are all fond of
flowers, and in the topi or pagri may often be seen a tuft of the wild
flowers in season, rod berries, or other ornament. The chief ornament
is the tabit, a square silver plate of varying size covered with carving
and hung from the neck. Gaddi women wear a dress like that of the
men, made of patti and called cholu. It hangs straight, like a gown,
from the neck to the ankles, and round the waist is the woollen cord
or dora. A cotton gown of a special pattern is now common and is
called ghundu. It is worn in the same way as the cholu. The head is
covered with a chadar, and the legs and feet are bare. The Gaddi
women wear special ornaments, of which the chief is the galsari, and
sometimes a tabít, similar like the men. They also wear heavy brass
anklets, called ghunkare which are peculiar to the Gaddi women.* The
Gaddis say that they assumed the garb of Shiva and Párvati when they
settled in Brahmaur which they call Shiv-bhúmi or Shiva's land,
but it is not their dress alone that makes them conspicuous. - Their
whole bearing is characteristic, conveying an impression of sturdy in-
dependence which is fully borne out by closer contact with thein. They
are robust of frame, and accustomed to exposure in all weather's owing
* Brass anklets called riháru, aro worn by Gaddi children to ward off the evil eye.
and to prevent them from crying. They are made by the menial caste, named riháru.
wbich is itself supposed to bave tbe power of injuring children by sorcery.



260
Gaddi Weddings.
far afield, the, and the winterbers of the family after
amb cattle and the Dharcut
to the migratory life so many of them lead. In their manners they are
frank and open, deferential to their superiors and yet manly and dignibed.
They delight in festive gatherings, and are fond of singing and dancing-
the latter in a style peculiar to themselves. Their women are pleasing
and comely, and have the reputation of being also modest and chaste.
The Gaddis are a semi-pastoraland semi-agricultural tribe, and own large
flocks of sheep and goats, which are their chief source of wealth. With
them they go far afield, the summers being spent in the higher
mountains of Pangi and Lihul; and the winters in the low hills bor.
dering on the plains. This duty the male members of the family take
in turn, the others remaining at home to tend the cattle and look after
the farm work. Many of them own land on both sides of the Dbaula
Dhár, and reap the winter crop in Kángra, returning in spring to cut
the summer crop iu Brahmaur. On the whole they are better shep-
herds than farmers, and perbaps for this reason they are the most
prosperous agricultural class in the State. The yearly exodus to Kángra
takes place in October and November, and the return journey in April
and May. With an appearance of candour and simplicity, the Gaddís
have the reputation of being good at making a bargain; hence the
saying in the hills---
Gaddi mitr bhola,
Denda tap to mangda chola.
“The Gaddi is a simple friend,
He offers his cap, and asks & coat in exchange.”
The Gaddi wedding customs merit special notice.
In betrothal the boy's parents or guardians send their parohit to
negotiate for a girl about whom they have information, and he brings
back her parents' reply. If it is favourable the boy's parents send
two or more respectable men to the girl's home to complete the bar-
gain. Then if it is clincbed, two of the boy's family go with the
parohit to perform the ceremony. If the betrotbal is dharma puna
this consists in the bride's father giving the parohit a bunch
of drub grass with four copper coins or more, if they please,
to be handed over to the boy's father in token that the alliance
is accepted. The parohit hands over the drub, and the coins are
returned to the parohit with a rupee added by the boy's father. The night
is spent at the bride's house, and after a meal her father gives the boy's
father 8 copper coins and these be places in a vessel as a perquisite to
the servant who cleans it. In a betrotbal by exchange (tola) the first
observances are the same, but when all go to qually complete the alliance a
grindstone and sil with 3 or 5 roris of gür, supári, bihan and roliyán* are
blaced before the party and then the parohit places supári, bihan and
roliyán in the skirt of his sheet and puts them on the sil. Before tapping
them on the sil with the grindstone he receives 4 annas from the boy's
father and mentions the names of the boy and girl whose alliance is to be
formed, and then taps them. After this the supári, etc., are placed in a
vessel, with the balls of gur broken op, and distributed to those present
after the girl's father has taken a bit. The elder members of the girl's
family do not take any as it would be contrary to custom. The boy's father
puts Re. 1-4 in this vessel and this is made over to the bride's parents
Roliyan red colour for marking the tika on the forehead: bihan, coriander.



Gaddi Weddings.
261
threar earthen lid
worshipping which he may
who get jewellery to that amount made for her. After this the bride
appears before the boy's father and he gives her a rupee. The rest of
the ceremony is exactly as described above, but in this case the coins put
in the vessel come out of the boy's father's pocket. The ceremony in the
other house is performed in exactly the same way, though not on the same
day for the sake of convenience. A propitious date is not fixed, but a
lucky day is desirable, and Tuesday, Friday and Saturday are considered
unlucky.
After having the date for the wedding fixed by a parohit tvo men
are sent to the girl's people with a ser of ghi to notify them of the date,
and if they approve of it messengers from both sides go to the parohit
and get him to write the lakhnoteri. For this he is paid 8 Chamba coins
or 4 annas in cash, rice and some red tape (dori). At the wedding itself
the sumhurat rite is first performed by worshipping Ganpati, kumbh * and
the nine planets and then the su pári (a mixture of turmeric, flour and
oil) purified by mantras is rubbed on the doy. Three black woollen
threads are also tied round his right wrist to protect him from the evil
eye. He is then taken out into the court-yard by his mother, with part
of her red sheet thrown over his head, to bathe. At the bath the black
thread is torn off and he is led back by his mother. Next he must up-
set ar. earthen lid, containing burning charcoal and mustard placed at
the entrance to the worshipping place, and this must be thrown away
so as to remove any evil influence which he may bave contracted in the
court-yard. The parohit then ties pine red cotton threads round the
boy's right wrist and gives him ghi and gu? to taste. These wristlets
are called kangana. This is preceded by the tel-sand ceremony. Again
Ganpati, Brahma, Vishnu, kumbh, dia † and the nine planets are wor-
shipped, and then a he-goat is sacrificed to the planets by the boy, its
blood being sprinkled on the sándori (bagar grass rope) und munj mála
(a ring of bagar). The sándori is then spread round the room along the
cornice and the bridegroom made to don a white dhoti or sheet round
his loins, to put flour mundras (jogi's ear.rings) in his ears, sling a satchel
over his shoulder, tie a black woollen rope round his chests and cover his
buttocks with an animal's skin, suspend a fanani (bow for carding wool)
to the black rope and take a timbar stick in his right hand with a
Brahminical thread tied round his right thumb. This dress is assumed so
that he may appear a regular jogi (ascetic). After this the presiding
priest asks him; 'why hast thou hecome a jogi ? His answer is to
receive the Brahminical cord.' Then he is further interrogated by the
priest as to wbat kind of cord he requires, i.e., one of copper, brass, silver,
gold, or cotton, and he asks for the latter. The priest then sends him to
bathe at Badri Narain, Trilok Náth and Mani-Mabesha, and these sup-
posed baths are taken in turn by dipping his hands and feet in, and
pouring some water on his face from, a vessel pot ready for the purpose
in the door-way. After these ablutions the pretended jogi begs, first of
his relations and then at the house, and they give him a piece of bread
and promise him cattle, goats, etc., according to their means. In conclu-
sion the priest asks him whether he wishes to devote himself to jatera
slippe being spar)
degroom, as jogiler rope Fanani his rights is as suresiding
* Kumbh. A small pitcher filled with water, is placed over a handful of rice and poach
leaves or a few blades of drub are put into it. It is worshipped exactly like the deotas.
† Dia. A small earthen lamp with a burning wick is placed over a handful of rice and
worshipped like the others,



262
Gaddi Weddings.
1
(worldly business) or mátera (an ascetic life) and he invariably answers
"to játora,' and then the priest makes him take off bis jogi's clothes,
receiving 4 annas as his fee for this. The cattle, etc., which the rela-
tions promised to the boy go to him and not to the priest.
This over, tbe boy is made to sit on a wicker basket, or a sheep-skin
bag for carrying grain (called khalru), and a dagger is placed on the
munj málá* above his head. Then the people pour oil over bis head,
with a few blades of grass (drub), taken from a vessel containing oil
and held by his mother's brother or in his absence by her sister. After
this the bridegroom fits an arrow to tbe fanani (bow) and shoots it at
the head of tbe dead goat which is placed over the nine planets, thereby
pretending to slay them. The rite of tasting gur and ghi by the boy
ends this ceremony. The bridegroom is then dressed. He wears a
white pagri (turban) and kuwa, a red luáncha, and a white pațka
with gulbadan suthan and a jault thrown over the shoulders. The
present (suhág-pațári) is theo arranged. It consists of a kharbás,
luáncheri, ghngru, ſ nau-dori, ll ungi, 1 chundi,** kángi, maninár, 3
roris of gur, dates, grapes, almonds, rice and 7 lúchis, aud these are
carried by the parohit to the bride's house, with the procession. The
boy is then veiled with a purified veil (sehra) by his mother's brother,
his brother's wife puts antimony on his eyes, and his sister fans him.
After this the boy gets up and the arti is then waved thrice from right
to left over his head by the parohit, and his mother throws three round
cakes (lúchis) on three sides of him. The árti must be sanctified by
mantras before being used at the door. After this the boy's father
gives him the tambol (present) of Re. 1, and 4 copper coins, the latter
being the parohits fee. The boy then gets into a doli in tho court.
yard and his mother gives him her breast to suck. The palki is then
carried by four bearers to the entrance, beneath the woollen parrots call-
ed toran, which, the boy, his mother and the parohit worship, and then
the bearers present the boy with a kumbh filled with water and he puts a
copper coin in it. The bridal procession, consisting of the male mem-
bers of the house and friends, dressed in their best clothes and preceded
by tom-toms, goes to the bride's house. On arrival the boy with his
followers is put up in a house other than the girl's, or camps out in the
open air. The boy's father or uncle, with one or two more, then takes a
basket full of round cakes to the bride's parents : this is called
bat partana. They return from the bride's house, after eating
something and putting 4 copper coins in the plate, and rejoin the
procession. This observance is called juth pái. Two respectable men
are also deputed to the bride's parohit, to settle the amount he will
take for performing the rites at the lagan, and then rejoin the camp.
The boy's parohit then proceeds to the bride's house to deliver the
barsúhitt (brido's) dress to her. The barsúhi consists of a white
sheet (dupatta), luáncheri, ghagarú, naudori, ungi, kangi (comb), (articles
* A small ring or wreath made of bagar grass.
+ All these are articles of dress.
* Khorbås, a dopatta of white cotton cloth : luáncheri, the bride's dress.
& Ghagru, coloured cloth for a shirt.
û The nau-dori or '9 doris' are red cords, four on either side at the back of the head,
plaited into the hair and convergiug into a ninth thick dorá which bangs down the back.
q Ungi, of iron with which the hair is parted in front: tbe kungi is a comb.
* Chundi is an antimony holder for the eyes, worn on the back of the head.
** It will be observed that the bars ühi consists of the samo articles as the sülág-patars,



Gaddi Weddings.
263
of attire), chundi, 3 balls of gur, cocoa, dates, grapes, almonds, 1 ser of
rice and 9 lúchís, 3 wheat cakes, 7 puris of chandar chúra,* roliyán,
kesar, sandhúr, nahání,t muth and supárii. The priest then comes back
to conduct the bridegroom and his followers to the bride's house with
tom-toms playing. The boy is received at the entrance by his mother-
in-law who performs the árti ceremony over him, waving it seven times
over his head with her right hand, holding her left over his turban.
Four turps are taken from the boy's right to his left and three in
the reverse direction. · Three cakes, placed in the plate with the
árti are also thrown out towards the court-yard. The priest
gives 4 chaklis (copper coins) to the boy who then places them in the
árti after clasping his hands before it. The mother-in-law then re-
tires, while the father-in-law comes to the spot and placing a patka
(white cloth) round his own neck, washes and worships his son-in-law's
feet. The boy's priest gives a duna (leaf-plate) with some rice, a wal-
uut, drub and flowers into his hands. Both the palms are held up-
wards, with both thumbs joined, and held up in his hands by the father-
in-law who brings the bridegroom into the verandah while, the mantras
are being recited. After this the bride is brought to the place and
made to stand a foot from him, face to face with the bridegroom.
The priest then takes hold of the boy's neck with his right hand and
of the girl's with his left and makes iheir shoulders thrice touch each
other, first pressing the boy's right to the girl's left. This is called
chán par chán. After this two torches are held on either side of them.
Seven small pieces of málti (jasmine) twigs are then put in the girl's
hands, she drops them into the boy's hands and he breaks them one
by one, placing them under his right foot. This breakicg of the twigs
is called chiri. It is preceded by giving bihúr into the hands of the
couple and they blow it at each other. This goes by the naine of farúri.
The pair are next made to sit down and the boy's father-in-law offers
sankalap, that is gives his daughter away, and then washes the couple's
feet as they sit before him. Certain minor rites, called chichari,s are
* Sandal-wood chips.
+ A sweet smelling root : muth, the root of a kind of grass,
Supári betel-nut: kesar---saffron.
$ Chichári. Two or three blades of drub are tied together with red cotton thiead and
placed in a cup of green leaves. Then a chakli (copper coin), til, rice, roliyán (turmeric),
some flowers, water and a walnut are also placed in it. This cup is put in the bridegroom's
hands and his father-in-law's hands are laid over them. The priest then recites some
mantras, after which the drut is taken up by the father-in-law and with it he sprinkleg
water from the cup thrice over the heads of the pair. This is called the pahla bishtar or
first chár. This is repeated, but the second iime some blades of grass, kesar (saffron)
sarván shadhe and flowers are thrown into the water. While the priest recites mantras
the father-in-law sprinkles water on the couple's feet. This second rite is called páda.
The third or argh ceremony is similar, but this time the mixture is made of dhain, til.
drub and rice, and after reciting mantras it is sprinkled over the boy's head.
The fourth rhár is called dua bishtar and is an exact repetition of the first chir.
The fifth chár (achmanii is solemnised by putting water, til, and rice iu a cup which is
placed on the ground as was done in the other chárs, but at the end of the ceremony the
priest thrice throws a few drops of water from the cup on to the father in-law's hands, and
the boy aod they drink it from his hands.
The sixth and last choir is called madhu parak. The cup is filled with milk, til and rice
and put in the boy's left hand; he daubs the four fingers and thumb of his right hand with
it and then lifts his hand towards his mouth and, putting it again into the cup, spriukles
its contents on the ground. This cup is then taken by ono of the bridegroom's jan (one
who has come with the procession) and given to the tom-tom player. This jan returns to the
bridegroom and after being purified by mantrus is allowed to mix again with the other men



264
Gaddi Weddings. .
now performed by the bridegroom and his father-in-law. Then
Ganpati,* Brahma, t Vislinu, I Kumbh, dia and the nine planets are
worshipped. After this one end of the girl's sheet is held out by her
brother and on this red tikka is sprinkled thrice by the boy. Simi.
larly the boy's waist-band is held out and anointed by the girl. The girl
then holds up her hands; and into them 4 copper coins, & walout, drub,
flowers, til and rice are thrown by the priest and then the boy is made
to lay his hands over hers. The priest then takes part of the bride's sheet
and wraps both pairs of hands in it by runding a tape (dori) round it.
The girl's father then performs the kaniá-dán (giving the girl
a way) with the proper mantras. At its conclusion the girl's maula
(mother's brother) touches her wrapper with a copper coin and it is
then unknotted, the things in the girl's hands being taken by the
boy and given to the parohit. The gur and ghi is then tasted and
this concludes the ceremony called lagan. The girl now retires, but
the boy remains to go through another rite called the manilir. After
doing the artí over the bridegroom, the tape with the betelout is then
put on thy boy's left toe and he is required to pierce the nut with
his dagger. This done, the priest takes the tape up and throws it over
the boy's head, passes it down to his heels and under his soles, and
then ties it round the pagri. The boy is then drawn by the manihár
by his mother-in-law and led inside the house to the kámdeo.|| The
girl is also brought there by her brother and dressed in the barsúhi
clotbes and placed by the boy's side before the picture. Finally the
remaining 7 doris of the barsúhí are handed over to the boy by the
girl's múmi (mother's sister) ; be places them on the bride's head and
then her hair is combed and arranged with these doris by her mumi
and the following song is sung :-
SARGUNDHI SONG.
Kun gori baithi sir kholi, hor
| Kum bai thí pith gher,
Gaura baithi sir kholi, hor
Isar baitha pițh gheri.
“Who is that beautiful girl sitting with her hair dishevelled ?
Who is sitting with his back turned ?
Oh, Gaura is sitting with her hair unconbed,
İsar (Shiva) is sitting with his back turned.”
*Ganpati is represented by a walnut in a green cup, placed before the boy under the canopy
on a heap of rice. It is given a copper coin--Ganpati being thus invoked to keep off mishaps,
+ Brahma's effigy is made of a few blades of drub, which are turned down twice, the
ends being fixed in cow.dung and placed in a green cup. He is then similarly worshipped
as being the Creator of the universe.
† Vishnu is represented and worshipped like Brahma, but the blades are only turned
down once from the centre in his case. Vishnu is worshipped as being the first Cause and
the Protector of the universe.
& Manihár.-Nine walnuts (the nine planets) are put on rice and worshipped and their
blessing invoked. There must be a separate handful of rice for each of the walnuts. A
bored copper coin, a betelnut and a cotton dori (three cords about 1} spans long)--all these
together are called manihár - but the ceremony is performed by taking the boy out to the
doorway and there he takes out his dagger from the waist and touches the coin with its
point, pretending to bore it. The string is then passed through the bored coin and put in
ä máni (grain measure) and then the manihár is sanctified' and tied round the boy's head.
dress by his mother-in-law at the gate.way after the árti.
|| A picturo.



263
the boy's fatheed piece whicha, too. It is thehen the bride aukles it wet
Gaddi Weddings.
After this the boy's jaul (shoulder-banu) and the bride's kharvás
(sheet) are knotted together and the bride is carried by her maternal
uncle (maula) to the canopy where the wedding is to be celebrated.
Under this canopy (baid) they are placed, on bamboo baskets covered
with woollen cloths, facing east. The bridegroom sits to the right of
the bride and in front of the sacred fire (homa or havan). The bride's
father then washes the couple's feet; after which Ganpati, Navagirah,
Brahma, Vislinu, Kumbh, Sat Rishi, Chaur Vedi, Chaur-disa (the four
quarters) and Chaur-updes (the four elements) are worshipped in due
order, to ward off mishaps. This is followed by placing fried barley
in a chhaj (sieve) which is brought to the baid. First, the bridegroom
takes a handful of this grain and puts it on three different spots, while
the bride's brother keeps wiping it away with his right hand as fast as
it is put down. This is repeated, but the second time the bride's
brother puts the grain down and the bridegroom wipes it away. This
is called khila* khedni and is dune to break the tie of relationship, if
any exists, between the contracting parties. After this khila khedni
the boy's father puts 4 aunas into the chhajt and the bride's brother
takes off the red piece which he has worn on his head during the cere-
mony and puts it in the chhaj too. It is then removed and the 4 annas
are claimed by the boy's brother-in-law. Then the bride's brother's
wife comes and grinds turmeric (haldar) on the sil and sprinkles it wet
on the feet of the pair, three times on each. She receives 4 takas, i.e.,
16 copper coins, for performing this rite. Then the couple are made
to stand up and walk round the sacred fire four times from right to
left. The bridegruon keeps his right hand on the bride's back all the
while. After each turn they are made to halt near the baskets and
their feel are worshipped, by throwing til, drub, milk, and red colour,
etc., by the bride's father, and at the end the bride's brother worships
the couple's feet in the same way. These four rounds are called
chárlái, and constitute the binding rite in the wedding. At the chárlái
two women sing the following song:-
CHARLAI SONG.
Pahlie lájária phirde kuánre,
Dújia lájária phirde Isar Gauraja,
Traja láira an an chát lái,
Chauthia lájária anjan tori nahsa.
“ In the first round of the lái go bachelors,
In the second round of the lái go Ishwar and Gauraja.
In the third round they let the anjant drag on the ground
In the fourth round the dulha (bridegroom) broke it and
ran away.
The bride and bridegroom now change seats and sit facing each
other. The bride then holds up her hands and in them & green leaf
cup (duná) containing some walnuts, rice, flowers, 4 coins, etc., is placed
by the priest. The bridegroom covers the bride's hands with his hands
and then the priest unknots the munihár from the boy's pagļi and puts
* Parched grain.
† Winnowing fan.
* In the marriage ceremony the bɔy wears a long strip of cloth round his shoulder and
the girl a kharvás (coloured sheet) over hər head. Both these are tied together when they
do the chárlái and the kaot which fastens thom together is oalled anjan.



266
Gaddi Weddings.
it on their hands. The bride's father thon takes til, drub, rice, flowers
and copper coins and the sankalap is performed to the recitation of
mantras. After this he places 4 copper coins and a rupee in the vessel
containing water, turmeric, milk and curd and sprinkles the mixture
on the baid (canopy). This is called sáj pána or giving of dowry. The
bride's riother's brother then comes and touches the boy's and girl's
hands with a ser of rice and a copper coin, and then they are released, the
manihár being given to the girl to be put round her neck. The rice
and coin go to the priest. After this all the girl's other relations and
friends give her presents, either in cash or in kind, according to their
social position. These presents are then divided thus:-To the bride's
and bridegroom's parohits 2 annas each; to the bride's pálki-carriers 4
annas; to the bridegroom's the same; and to the carpenter (bádhi) who
erects the temple and the canopy (baid) 4 annas also : to the bride's
musicians 2 annas; and to the bridegroom's 4 apnas. After this the
bride's parohit counts the things received in dowry, receiving for this 8
copper coins, with four more as dehl (door-way) for acting as the family
priest. Of the residue a fourth goes to the bride and a tenth of the re-
mainder is appropriated by her priest. The balance with the canopy is
then given by the bride's father as sankalap to the boy's father and forms
part of the paraphernalia. After this the gotra-chår mantras are read
and fried rice is thrown towards the couple by both the priests. Each
gets 4 annas for reading the gotra.chár. This is followed by making
the fathers of the couple sit under the canopy, and a blade of drub is put
by the bride'e priest into the girl's father's hands. He holds it between
the tips of his middle fingers at one end, the other end being similarly
held by the boy's father. The bride's father then says: “asmat kania,
tusmat gotra," meaning “our girl passes to your got." The ends of the
blade are then reversed and the boy's father says: “tusmat kania, asmat
gotra," meaning “ your girl has come into our got.” At the conclusion
the bridegroom comes to the end of the canopy where he receives rulár
(salutation with a present) from his mother-in-law and the other elderly
women of the bride's house. The mother-in-law gives & rupee in cash
and 4 copper coins, the others only copper coins, and without receiving
this gift from the women it is not etiquette for him to appear before
them. The boy touches the bride's mother's feet in token of her giving
him this privilege. The ceremonies at the bride's are now over and the
bride is taken in the palki, with all the paraphernalia, followed by the
bridegroom, his followers and friends, to his house.
Song sung on the bride's arrival at the bridegroom's house
Soi (pichaik) aunde-jo ádar dejánde-jo bhali már;
Hallare jánde.jo mochar-már-bhale bhale adar.
“ Receive the soi (tbose who come with the bride) with courtesy
and on their departure give them a good thrashing.
Give to this hallar (bastard) a shoo boating, this is good treatment
for bim."
On arrival at the door-way the followirg song is sung :
ATALAI SONG.
Ham ku pújna kun gori ai,
Ham ku pújna Gaura ai,
Ham ku púj de putri phal mangde.



Gaddi Weddings.
267
" Who is that beautifol girl who has come to worship a pome.
granate tree?
It is Gaura who has come to worship,
While she is worshipping she is praying for a son,”
Then the árti is presented by the boy's mother and she also gives the
bride a rupee. Next the pair are conducted to the kámdeo (picture on
the wall), and Ganpati, etc., are worshipped, after which they are both
made to go four times round the earthen lamp (diwa) and kumbh (pot
containing water), tape and a bunch of pompegranate. This circum-
ambulation is called the athlií (eight rounds).
After this the bridal veil is taken off by the parohit and the imitation
birds on the veil are given to the priest, the brothers of the couple and
their newly acquired mitras (brothers made by sacred observance).
Having done the athláí the bride and bridegroom's wrist threads are
loosened by two men who thus become brothers. These threads were
put on by them at the commencement of the preliminary observances.
At the conclusion the bridegroom receives presents (tambol) from the
men and women, ard similarly munhoání from the women is received
by the bride for unveiling her. Songs are sung by the women on these
occasions.
The following feast-song is sung at the bridegroom's house :-
Kuniaye chauka paya, kuni dhotore hath pair,
Janne chauka paya, soi dhotore hath pair, darohi Rám Rám,
Bhat paríthá, más paríthá, upar parithe táre máre,
Bhate máse khae nu dáne 8oi, bahím kárd hare here.
“Who has smeared the floor with cowdung; who has washed the
hands and feet?
The jan (followers of the bridegroom) have done it, the soi (fol.
lowers of the bride) hare washed their hands and foet: we
appeal to Rám (for the truth of our statement),
Boiled rice has been given, meat has been given, over, them have
been given small pebbles,
The soi know not how to eat rice and meat, the sister expresses
surprise (by saying) 'háre háre'."
Four feasts are given in the boy's house to the guests : 1st, on the
day of the oil ceremony; 2nd, on the morning on which the procession
starts to the bride's house ; 3rd, on the day the procession returns home,
and 4th, on the morning on which the bridegroom receives presents.
The first two feasts are given at the bride's house on the oil day to
the guests of the girl and the last two on the marriage day to the bride.
groom and his followers and to the bride's guests.
Another form of marriage called bujkya is common in which the
ceremony is gone through only at the bride's house, thus saving ex.
pense.
The Gaddis also practise the form of marriage called jhind phuk,
solemnised by burning brushwood and circumambulating the fire eight



268
Gaddi Death Customs.
est or relation; or in the marriagets have "o.
times hand in hand, or with the bride's sheet tied to the boy's girdle.
It is admissible in cases where a girl's parents have consented to her
betrothal but refuse to carry out the marriage, and is sometimes dono
forcibly by the bridegroom; or in cases in which a girl elopes with her
lover. No priest or relative need attend it.
Widow remarriage is permitted, except among the Brahmans. The
rite is called gudani or jhanjarára and also choli-dori and is solemnised
thus:-The pair are made to sit down by the diwa and kumbh, with
some dhúp burning. They worship both these objects, then the bride-
groom places a dori (tape) on the widow's head and another woman
combs her head and binds her hair with the tape. After tbis the bride-
groom places a nose-ring (bálú) in the woman's hand and she puts it on.
This is the binding portion of the ceremony. A feast is given to guests
and relations and songs are sung. If no priest presides at the ceremony
the kumbh, etc., worship is dispensed with, but the tape and ring cere-
mony is gone through and the guests, etc., feasted. A widow used to
be compelled to marry her husband's elder or younger brother, but the
custom is no longer enforced by the State.
Divorce is permitted by mutual consent, but there is no special form,
A divorcée may remarry.
Sons, whether by a wife married for the first time, or by a widow or
divorcée remarried, succeed, but illegitimate sons do not, unless they
are adopted in default of legitimate sons or heirs. The eldest son gets
an extra share, called jaithund, but he has per contra to pay a propor-
tionately larger share of any debts. Among the sons the property is
otherwise divided mundavand, i. e., equally, except in Kángra, where the
chundavand rule prevails among that small part of the tribes, which ori-
ginally came from the southera side of the upper Rávi in Chamba.*
The Gaddís also have the custom whereby a widow's child (chaukandhu)
born at any time after her husband's death succeeds to his property,
provided that the widow has continued to live in his house and has
worn a red dori (tape) in the name of his chula (oven) or darát (axe).
Cases have even occurred in which the widow has retained her late
husband's property without complying with these conditions, though
the Gaddis consider her rights disputable.
Gaddis burn their dead. Lepers and those who dio of luhar, a kind
of typhus, are first buried, but their corpses are exhumed after three
months and burut. The ceremonies performed are the same as for those
who are burnt. The body is placed on the funeral pyre with the head
of the deceased to the north, and all the jewellery and the blanket, which
is thrown over it when on the bier, are taken off and the body burnt.
A copper coin is placed by the pyre as the tax of the land on whicht
the body is burnt. Fire is first applied to the pyre under the head by
the nearest relative and the other gotrís (blood relations). The parohit
joins the relations in this observance, but no ceremonies are observed,
The light is applied after going round the pyre once from left to right.
On the 10th day after the demise ths daspindi ceremony is performed
* Sir J. B. Lyall's Kángra Settlement Report, $ 74, quoted in P. C. L. II, p. 183.
+ In allusion to the idea that the Muhammadans own the world, Hindus the sky, and
that the owners' land must not be used unless paid for.



Gaddi Beliefs.
269
the seed on the ch buried i
by the nearest blood relations, with the aid of the parohit. Other rela-
tions wash their clothes and bathe on this day and remove the kambal
which is spread to receive the mourners. On the 12th day, at night, a
he-goat is sacrificed in the deceased's pame. This goat is given to the
parohit. Next morning five pinds (balls of rice) or one supindi are
again offered to the deceased by the chief inourrer, to the recitation of
mantras by the parohit. The clothes, utensils, cash, etc., are given to
him. On the 14th day the deceased's relations on the wife's side come
to the house in the morning and give a feast to the brotherhood. A
goat is killed for this feast and the mourning ceases from this day. At
the end of the third month oblations are again offered to the deceased
and the occasion is sigo alised by a feast to the brotherhood. All the
offerings made in this ceremony go to the parohit who presides over it.
Similar ceremonies are gone through at the end of the sixth month and
the 1st and 4th years.
If buried the body is laid Hat in the grave with the back
on the ground and the palms of both hands folded on the chest. The
head is kept to the utar (north). Children and females are buried in
the same way. When burnt the ashes are collected, together with
the seven bones of the finger, knee and ankle joints, on the day the
corpse is burnt. They are brought to the house in a piece of masru *
and kept for ten days in the clothes in which the deceased breathed
his last and in the room in which he expired. After the daspindi
they are washed in honey, milk, clarified butter, cowdung and bilpatri
seed and then dried and deposited in a small wooden box, wrapped in
the piece of masru and buried in a recess made in the wall of the
house, with a coativg of barley and mustard over it. They should be
taken to Hardwár to be thrown into the Ganges as soon as the family
has collected sufficient funds for the journey, and at most within four
years.
The religion of the Gaddis presents some interesting features. As
we have seen the Gaddis are by preference Shaivas,t but their worship
is catholic to a degree. Thus on Sundays and Thursdays Nágs and
Sidhs are worshipped, on Sundays alone Kailang, Devís on Tuesdays,
and on Thursdays 'Bírs.
To the Nágs, ahri or beestings, male kids or lambs, and ora (the
first-fruits of all crops), incense and small cakes are offered ; and to
the Sidhs a sack, a stick of rose-wood, a crutch, sandals and rot or
thick bread.
To the Dovís are offered vermilion, bindli (brow-mark), sálu (a red
chádar), dora (waist-rope), sur (a coarse spirit), and a goat.
To the Bírs a be-goat, a chola or thick woollen coat, a waistband, a
wbite conical cap (chukanni topi) and fine bread. Kailu Bír, the numen
of abortion, is only worshipped by women. Kailung is a Nág, and
the father of all the Nágs. He is worshipped, as is Shiva, under the
and on 70 worship agree. Thoy preferen, some into
* The cloth in which the corpse is wrapped.
† As the verse goes:
Gaddi chárda bhedán :
The Gaddís feed their flocks :
Gaddin dindi dupa.
The Gaddins offer incense (to Sha),
Gaddt jo dinda bhedán
To the Gaddís he (Shiva) gives she
Gaddin jo dindi rupa,
And to the Gaddins, beauty.



270
Gaddi godlings.
form of the darát or sickle, which is always carried by a Gaddi
when shepherding his flocks. Then there is the worship of autars.
An autar is the spirit of a person who has died childless and causes
sickness. To propitiate this spirit the sick person dons clothes, which
are made for him with a silver image of the deceased, and he then
worships the autar idol (which is always set up near a stream).*
The clothes and image are worn “in token of the deceased."
Autars are said to have been admitted into the category of the deities
owing to their evil influences on men and women. They are propiti-
ated also on the Amáwas and Puran máshi days.
Autars also appear in dreams and wúro people that they will carry
them off to the next world. To scare away the ghost in soch a case
jamanwála is performed, 4 balis, offerings of ghunganián (boiled maize),
nettle baths, and bran bread being offered four times by night.
But these do not exhaust the list of beliefs. Batál is the sprite of
springs, rivers and wells, and khicheri, sodden Indian corn, 3 balls of
suhál (inoss), 3 of ashes, 3 measures of water, a pumpkin or a flour-
sheep are offered to him.
To joginis or rock spirits, 3 coloured grains of rice, 5 sweet cakes, a
loaf, à flour-lamp with a red wick, 3 kinds of flowers, 3 pieces of dhup,
and a she-goat are offered with prayers. Rákshanis and banásats
would seem to be the same as joginis. Chungu is the demon found
on walnut and mulberry trees and under the karangora shrub. He is
worshipped with a cocoa-nut, a chuhora (handle of a plough), almonds,
grapes, milk and a loaf of 5 paos with his effigy in flour (a basket on
his back), a four-cornered lamp of flour on the bread, and a piece of
dhup.
Gunga, the disease-spirit of cows, is propitiated by setting aside a
tawa of bread in his name until the final offerings can be made.
Then a piece of iron, something like a bockey-stick, is made, and the
deity taken into the cattle-shed where he is worshipped by the sacred
fire on a Thursday, A he-goat is killed and a few drops of the blood
surinkled on the iron. At the same time cakes are offered and some
eaten by one member of the household, but not by more than one or
the scourge will not abate, and the rest are buried in the earth. Every
fourth year this deity is worshipped after the same fashion. Kail u is,
it seems, peculiar to the Gaddis, or at least to Chamba. Early in
pregnancy the woman puts aside 4 chaklis, (the copper coin of Chainba)
with her necklace in the name of Kailu. Two or three months after
delivery the parohit, with the woman, worships the demon by putting
up a large stone under a walout or kainth tree, which is sanctified by
reciting certain mantras and then worshipped. A white goat (which
inay have a black head) is then offered up to the demon, by making an
incision in its right ear and sprinkling the blood over a long cloth, 21
yards wide by 9 or 12 yards long, and chaklis and some bread are also
offered to the demon.
Finally the woman tastes a piece of gur, and places it on the cloth,
which she then wears until it is worn out, when a new one is made and
When first set up the idol is worshipped with prayers and the sacrifice of a he-goat or
sheep. Dhain and khicheri are also placed before it and then eaten by the autar's relatives.



Gadgor-Gadgor.
271
purified in the same way before being worn. The ceremony may be
performed at the woman's house, in which case the cloth alone is used as a
symbol of the deity. The goat is returned to its owner with the four
coins. No other woman may use this sheet, which would cause her
divers bodily ills.
Ploughing, sowing and reaping should be begun on the lucky days
Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday. If the wheat does not grow on a terraced
field the plough is not put on it again that year until a goat has been
sacrificed there, and neglect of this rule will result in a death in the
family. When new ground is to be broken up the parohit must be asked
to name the day and a he-goat sacrificed before the plough is put to it.
But instead of this sacrifice, some people take four young girls to the spot
and there wash their feet, mark their foreheads with red and give them
gur to eat before they begin to plough. And the first fruits of such land
are always offered to the deota before being used. The godlings associ-
ated with chinia, maize, wheat, pulse and barley are Devi, Chaund,
Kailung, Kathura Nag and Sandholu Nag respectively.
The chief fairs are seven in number, viz., the Basua on 1st Baisakh,
the Patroru on 1st Bhádon, the Sair on 1st Assauj, the Lahori (cr Lohri)
on 1st Mágh, and the Dholru on 1st Chet. The dates of the Shibrát
(in Phágan on varying dates) and of the Holi (in Phágan or Chet) vary. -
The first four festivals are celebrated by games and dances, but there
are differences. At the Basua pindiris or flour cakes are eaten with ghi
and honey. At the Patroru a cake of a vegetable called siul is eaten :
only young girls dance. At the Sair babrus are cooked : and at the
Lohri khichri or rice and dál. At the Holi khaddas (parched waize) are
eaten, the fire is worsbipped at night and a performance called barn held,
songs being also sung. At the Dholru again pindiris are eaten, but
amusements are rarely allowed. There seems to be no annual feast of
dead. Shiva and the Devis are sacrificed to on a Shibrátri.
The seasons for worship are :-Chet, pilgrimages to Bawan and
Jawalaji in Kángļa.
Bhádon and Asauj, pilgrimages to the shrides of Narsingh, Hari-har,
Lakshmi Devi, Ganesh, Kailung—all in Brahmaur; and in Bhadon only,
as a rule, to Mani Mahesha. Shiva is not worshipped at any particular
season.
The low-castes in Brahmaur are chiefly Hális, Kolís, Lohárs and Riha.
rås, with a few Sippis and Bádhis. All these are described in their
proper places. An obscure group is the Baráru, sometimes called Bháts,
who are described as Gaddis, and hold among them the same position
as Brahmans do among other Hindus. The name appears to be connected
with barári, a thorny shrub.
The Gaddi salutations ara as follows :-- Among Brahmans, namaskár.;
to Brahmans from others, pairi pauna to which they reply asír bachan.
Rájputs give jai jai to one another and receive it from those beneath them;
responding with rám rám. Khatris, Thákurs and Rathís offer luárki to
one another and receive it from the low-castes, giving in reply rám rárn,
GADGER, an agricultural clan fouod in Shahpur.
CADGOR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Millán.
ne ponding with jai toont pain, to



272
Gadha- Gadún.
GADHá (?) shepherd, cowherd; also called rawúnri in Pesháwar.
GADAI, a term of contempt said to be applied by Nihangs (Akálís) to those
who smoke.
GADAIOK, a tribe small in numbers, but intelligent and enterprising, found in
å few villages of the Central Salt Range. Their traditions assert
that their ancestor Mahta Chandú Rai came from Mathrá to Delhi and
entered the Mughal service under Bábar, who employed him with Rája
Mal Janjúa to drain the eastern Dhanní tract in the Salt Range.
Gharka Kassar and Sidhar Manhás afterwards aided them to colonisa
the tract, and Bábar granted Chandú Rai a percentage in the revenue of
the Dhanní and other tracts in the Salt Range. Humáyún granted
Káli or Kálik Dás, son of Chandú Rai, a sanad * (dated 1554) of 30,000
tankás for the improvement of the Kahún tract and the family also
received sanads from Akbar and Aurangzeb. In the latter's reign one
branch of the tribe was converted to Islám, but most of its members
are still Hindus. Gadhiok is said to be & corruption of gaddi-hok,
ou its ancestors having presented 31 gad dis at a hukáí (the announce-
ment of the presents brought at a wedding). The Gadhiok usually
marry among themselves, but some interinarry with Khatrís of the
Bárí group, though never with Bunjábís. In neither case is widow
marriage allowed. Their Brahmaps are of the Naulí got and at a
boy's munnan or head-shaving the father or head of the family himself
decapitates a goat with a sword and gives the head, feet and skin to the
Naule parohits of the tribe, though they do not eat flesh and other
Brahmans would not touch such offerings. The skin, etc, are sold.
A similar observance is in vogue at the janeo investitura. Gadhioks
eat flesh at weddings, a usage contrary to local Hindu custom. At
the munnan of a first-born son the custom found among some other
Khatrís is followed and the mother flees to the house of a neighbour
who plays the part of her parents. Her husband would bring her back
again, and remarry her by the dukâja or second wedding' which costs
about half as much as the first. Gadhioks avoid touching weighing
scales, t at least in theory, and also usary, but one or two families, not
admitted to be descendants of Kálí Dás or true Gadhioks, have no such
scruple. No Gadhiok will wash, set out on a journey or begin a new
task on a Thursday--the day on which their ancestor left bis original
home. Hindu Gadhioks eat and driuk with Khatrís : Muhammadans
with any Muhammadan save a Mochí or Musallí. The latter style them.
selves Shaikh : while the Hindus generally use the title of Mahta, but
the family of Dalwál is styled Díwán, Múlráj, one of its members having
been governor of Hazára, under the Sikhs, The samadh of Kálí Dás
is a conspicuous object at Kallar Kabár. The Gadhioks have many
kabits, apparently in a down-country dialect, and now claim Rajput
origin or status, but they are probably of Khatrí extraction as their
intermarriage with tuat caste shows.
Gápi, a Baloch clan (agricultural) tound in Shahpur: see also under Gaſși:
GADÚN, or Jadún, as they are called indifferently, are a tribe of
Pathans found in Hazára and in Attock. They claim descent from
* This sanad contains a reference to the Bágh-1-Safá established at Kallar Kahar by
Babar an l mentioned in his Memoirs.
+ implying that retail trade is oordered derogatory.



Gadwár-Gágrah.
273
Sarhang, a great-grandson of Ghurghusht, two of whose guns fled, they
say, because of a blood feud to the mountains of Chach and Hazára.
It is almost certain that the Jadún are not of Indian origin; though it
has been suggested that in their name is preserved the name of Jádu
or Yádu, the founder of the Rájput Yádúbansi dynasty, many of
whose descendants migrated from Guzerat some 1,100 yoars before
Christ, and were afterwards supposed to be found in the hills of Kábul
and Kandahar. They occupy all the south-eastern portion of the
territory between the Peshawar and Hazára borders, and the southern
slopes of Mahában, having been assigned their present lands in the
eastern Sama after Malik Ahmad and the Kashi chiefs of the Afgháns had
defeated the Dilazák. And when Jahángír finally crushed the Dilazák,
they spread up the Dor valley as high ay Abbottábád. Early in the
18th century, on the expulsion of the Karlugh Turks by Saiyid Jalál
Bába they appropriated the country about Dhamtaur; and about a
hundred years later they took the Bagra tract from the few remaining
Dilazak who held it, while shortly before the Sikhs took the country
their Hassazai clan deprived the Karrál of a portion of the Nilán valiey.
They are divided into three main clans, Sálár, Marsúr, and Hassanzai,
of which the last is not represented among the trans-Indus Jadún and
has lost all connection with the parent tribe, having even forgotter.
its old Pashtu language, Bellew made them a Gakkhay clan, but
this appears to be quite incorrect. The true Patháns of Hazára call
them mlátar or mercenaries, from the Pashtu equivalent for lakban or
“ one who girds his loins". In Hazára a Sálár occupy the Rajoia plain;
the Mansúr are found in Mangal and in and round Nawanshahr; while
the Hassanzais reside in Dhamtaur and the adjacent villages, and in
the Mangal and Bagra tracts. The two former tribes keep up a slight
connection with the Pathians to the west of the Indus, and a few can
still speak Pashtu. After they had obtained a footing to the east of
the Indus, in Hazára, these three tribes elected a Hassanzai of Dhamtaur
to the Khún-ship, and his son succeeded him, but the chiefship is now
in gbeyance, though the family is still looked up to. In this part the
Durráni rule was quite nomioal and the Jadúos of Hazára only paid
them a horse, a falcon or two and a small sum of money as tribute.
Gadwár, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
Gad, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Gagi, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
Gágra, a small caste, for the muust part Mussalınán, and chiefly found
in the central districts. They wander about catching and eating
vermin, but their hereditary occupation is that of catching, keeping,
and applying leeches; and they are often called Jukera, from jonk, &
leech. They also make matting and generally work in grass and
straw, and in some parts the coarse sacking used for bags for pack
animals and similar purposes is said to be made almost entirely by
them. The Mubammadan Gágras marry by nikoh. They seem to
fulfil some sort of functions at weddings, and are said to receive fees on
those occasions. It is said that they worship Bála Shah, the Chúhra
guru. Also called Gágri or Gegri and Jokharu.
Gágkar, a Ját clan (agricultural) fauud in Muitais



274
Gagrei-Gakkhar.
GAGREL, a Mulanmadan Nai converted from Hinduism, in Karnál.
Gáni, see under Ghái.
GAKKHAR, an important Muhammadan tribe, found in Jhelum, Ráwal.
pindi and Hazára. Regarding the Gakkhars in the first-named district
Mr. W. S. Talbot writes :-
"The Gakkhars, though not numerically important, are in other respects
one of the most prominent tribes in the Jhelum district, and in social
position amongst the Musalınáns of the tract share with the Janjuá
the honour of the first place : in popular estimation indeed they seem to
rank a little higher than even the Janjúás. They are almost entirely
confined in this district to the Jhelum tahsil, where they hold the bulk
of the Khuddar circle, with a good many villages in the Maidán: else-
where they are found in any numbers only in the Ráwalpindi and
Hazára districts.
Origin.—Of the history and origin of this tribo much has been written :
the earliest suggestion, that of General Court, that the name of the
Gakkhars points to their descent from the Greeks, has not found
later supporters : though it has now been adopted and improved upon by
some of the present representatives of the tribe, who claim descent from
Alexander himself ! Mr. A. Brandreth * adopted the local tradition, that
the Gakkhars came from Persia through Kashmír,' which is still the
claim of the majority of the Gakkhars themselves. The views of
General Cunningham are set forth at length in his Archæological
Survey Reports, II, pp. 22 to 33, to which the curious must be
referred for the detailed reasoos on which he basas his conclusion, that
the Gakkbare represent the "Savage Gargaridae' of Dionysius the
Goographer, (who wrote probably in the 4th Century A. D.), and
are descendants of the great Yuechi Scythians, who entered India from
the North-West in the early centuries of the Christian era. Sir
Denzil Ibbetson † notices with approval Mr. Thomson's comment I
on Cunningham's theory ; 'though the Turanian origin of the Gakkhaſs
is highly probable, yet the rest of the theory is merely a plausible
surmise. On the whole there seems to be little use in going beyond the
sober narrative of Ferishta, who represents the Gakkhars as a brave
and savage race, living mostly in the hills, with little or no religion, and
much given to polyandry and infanticide.'
As already indicated, the story of most of the Gakkhar is that they are
descended from Kaigohar or Kaigwár Sháh, of the Kaianís family once
roigning in Ispabán: that they conquered Kashmir and Tibet, and ruled
those countries for many generations, but were eventually driven back to
Kábul whence they entered the Punjab in company with Mahmud
Ghaznavi early in the 11th Century: this story is rejected by Ibbetson,
* Jhelum Settlement Report, $ 48.
† Punjab 'Census Report, 1881, § 463.
$ $ 57, Jhelum Settlement Report.
$ It ie not possible to obtain satisfactory information regarding this word. The city of
Kayán was the capital of Kai Kayús, Kai Kubád, and Kai Khasru; and some say that the
Gakhbaſs call themselves Kayání boca use they claim descent from these three kings.
Othors say that the Mugbals proper, and especially the Chughattas and Qizilbáshes, are
Kayáefs; and that the Gakkbaſs call themselves Kanádi or Canaanites becanso they claim
descent from Jacob and Joseph who lived in Canaan; and that it is this word which has
beon miarc ad Kayání.



All the historialakkhaļs, killed in other cases Here are no such
Gakkhar, history.
278
because on Ferishta's showing a Gakkhar army resisted Mahmúd: and
that it is at any rate certain that they held their present possessions loog
before the Muhammadan invasion of India : on the other side it will be
of interest to notice briefly below the contentions of the most prominent
member of the tribe of the present time, the late Khan Bahadur Rájá
Jahándád Khán, E, A, C., who has made a most painstaking study of
the original authorities : it must be noted, however, that, particularly in
the exactness of the references to the authorities cited by him, there is
something wanting, owing to his omission to supply further information
asked for: bis views are as follows:
All the historians before the time of Forishta agree that the Kho-
khars, not the Gakkhars, killed Shaháb-ad-din Ğhori. Ferishta cer.
tainly confused these two tribes, in other cases : thus he frequently
refers to Shekha and Jasrat as Gakkhař chiefs; there are no such
names in the Gakkhar tree, whereas Shekha and Jasrat appear as
father and son in the genealogy of the Khokhars : see tree given in the
vernacular settlement report of the Gujrát district, by Mirza Azim Beg,
1865. (Tubagát.2-Akbari, pp. 18, 19, 127, 147 and 600; Rauzat-ut.
Táhirin, Elliot, I, p. 301; Muntakhib-ut-Tawáríkh, p. 18; Ibn-i-Asír,
Elliot, II, p. 433 ; Tabaqát-i-Nasiri, pp. 123-4, etc.)
Forishta's account of the Gakkhaşs as a tribe of wild barbarians,
without either religion or morality, practising polyandry and infanti-
cide, is a literal translation from the Arabic of Ibn-i-Asír, an earlier
historian, who was there, however, writing of the wild tribes in the
hills to the west of Pesháwar, and not of the Gakkbars : the chapter in
Ibn-i-Asír immediately following deals with the murder of Shahab-ud.
dín by the Gakkhara : hence perhaps the mistake ; or Ferishta may have
borne a grudge against the Gakkhars, who are said by him to have
maltreated an ancestor of his own named Hindu Sháh. (Ibn-i-Asír,
p. 82, Elliot, XII, Ferishta, p. 159).
Gakkbar Shah, alias Kaigwár Shah, is mentioned as one of the prin.
cipal followers of Mahmúd of Ghazni. (Iqbálnáma-i.Jahangiri, p. 109;
Akbar Náma, p. 242).
The use of the Hindu titlo of “ Rájá” has been taken as evidence that
the Gakkhar story of their origin is incorrect; but up to comparatively
recent times the Gakkhaſ chiefs used the title of Sultán, Some sanada
of the Mughal emperors are cited, and other evidence, but the refer.
encos need not be given, as it is certain that the title of Sultán was
formerly used by this tribe.
In La Perron's History of the Pársis,* p. 27, it is said that & migration
of Persians to Chină, under a son of Yazdezard, took place in the 7th
century: it is suggested that this was the occasion when the ancestors
of the tribe settled in Tibet: an old M.S. podigree-table produced shows
a Sultán Yazdajar some 45 generations back.
An officer wno knew the Gakkhars well wrote of them : "Some
of their principal mon are very gentlemanly in their bearing, and show
unmistakably their high origin and breeding' : ,, another says : « They
are essentially the gentlemen and aristocracy of tho (Ráwalpindii
district: ... The Gakkhars still bear many traces of their high
descent in their bearing, and in the estimation in which they are held
• Vol. I, Karaka, 1884, citing the Zend Avesta, I, cccxxxvi,



276
The Gakkhar clans.
throughout the district.' Mr. Thomson wrote of them: Physically the
Gakkhașs are not a large-limbed race, but they are compact, sinowy,
and vigorous. They make capital soldiers, and it has boen stated on
good authority that they are the best light cavalry in Upper India.
They are often proud and self-respecting, and sometimes exceedingly
well-mannered. All this dges them no more than justice ; and to any.
one who knows them well, the statement that as late as the 13th
century they were wild barbarians, without religion or morality, is in
itself almost incredible. Rája Jahándád Khán seems to have succeeded
in tracing the libel to its origin: he shows also that they have
sometimes been confused with the Khokhars;* but it cannot be said that
his arguments in favour of their Persian origin are very couvincing :
in the matter of the assassination of Shaháb-ud-din Ghori, the his.
torians who state that he was killed by the Gakkhara at Dhamiak in
this district are supported by a strong local tradition.
Clans and Mandis.- The Gakkhars have split into many branches, of
which the most important in this district are the Admál, the Iskandral
and the Bugial, who occupy most of the Khuddar circle : a smaller
clan named Firozál hold a few villages close to Jheluin : and a still
smaller branch, the Tuliál (wbich is little esteened, and with which the
other clans do not intermarry), has four or five estates on the river pear
Dína. The clan-names are in all cases derived from those of the com-
mon ancestors : the principal seats or mother villages of each branch are
called Mandis, of which there are six generally recognised in the Jhelum
district : Sultánpur (Admál); Lebrí and Bakrála (Iskandrál) ; Domeli,
Padhrí, and Baragowah (Bugiál) : Bheth and Salihál, formerly flourish-
ing mandis of the Bugiál, are now decayed.
Character. Regarding the character of the Gakkhars there is not
much to add to what has already been said : pride of race is very strong
in them, and though they make good soldiers, they are bad farmers :
and where they have not fallon back on Government service, they are
almost always in a most unprosperous condition, being much wanting
in industry and thrift: their most unpleasing characteristic is their in-
tense jealousy of one another, which leads to bitter fouds, and some-
times to murder.
History. The first settlement of the tribe in this district is generally
admitted to be Abriám in Suitánpur, under the Lehrí hills : thence
they spread over the Khuddar, southwards towards the river, and as
far as Landi Patti to the wes being constantly opposed by tho Janjúás
who were almost invariably defeated ard ejected : in his first invasioi.
of India Bábar took the part of the Janjúás, and with them defeated
Hátí Khán, the great Gakkbar chief of Pharwála, but in a subsequent
invasion made friends with the Gakkhars and procured from them an
auxiliary force. When Bábar's son, Humáyún, was in A. D. 1542
Busted by Sher Sháh, the principal Gakkhar chiefs took the side of the
exile: to bridle their pride Sher Shah built the huge fort of Rohtás,
about ten miles from Jhelum : and in the constant warfare that followed
the Gakkhar country was terribly harried, but the tribe was never sub-
dued, and on Humáyún's return to power began to grow powerful,
auxiliary Forde, friends with her chief of phases and with thirst invasions
* See also an article in the Indian Antiquary, 1907, 'The Khokharş and the Gakkbass
in Punjab History' by M. A. Rose, I.C.8



Gajja-Gandapur.
277
Their snbsequent history unül the rise of “Saltán” Muqarrab Khán,
about 1740 Å. D., chiefly concerns other districts : he was an Admál
chief of the Rawalpindi district; and claimed to rule the whole of the
tract from Attock to the Chenab; the Domeli Bugiáls however did not
acknowledge his pretensions, and on his defent by the Sikhs at Gujrát,
they at once rebelled, captured Muqarrab Khán and murdered him. The
usual internecine feuds then arose, and the different clans fell in turn
an easy prey to the Sikhs, though the eastern hill mandís were never
thoroughly subdued, and were in constant rebellion until the beginning
of the British rule: in 1849 the Gakkhařs nearly all took the losing
side, and therefore forfeited much of their possessions and digoities,
falling on evil days, from which they have only extricated tbemselves
by tho readiness with which they have since taken employment under
Government."*
In Hazára the Gakkbars have had a still more chequered history.
Descended from Fateh Khán, founder of Khanpur, to whom the hills of
Khánpur as well as those of the Karrál and Dhúnd were entrusted by
his grandfather Sultán Sarang Khán about the ond of the 16th century,
the Ghakkars could not keep the Karrál and Dhúnd tribes under control
during the decline of the Mughal dynasty. Under Durráni rule how.
ever they were given charge of the lower parts of Hazára, their chief
Sultán Jáfar Khán being famous for his uprightness. But Sirdár Hari
Singh drove them from their lands and they were not reinstated till
1868-72, when they recovered almost the whole of the Khánpur tract.
GAJJá, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Gal, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Multán.
Galbáná, an agricultural clan found in Shábpur.
GALBÁB, a Ját clan (agricoltural) found in Multán.
GALWATRAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GANDAPUR : A Pathán tribe of Ushtaráni (Saiyid) extraction. Besides the
original stock they include by afiliation some offshoots of the Shirani,
the Múshezai section of the Gburghushti Patháns, and the Ránízai sec-
tion of the Yúsufzai tribe. They hold the whole of the north-western
part of trans-Indus Dera Ismáíl east of Tánk and south of the Nila Koh
ridge of the Salt Range, comprising an area of 460 square milos, abutting
on the Sulaimáns to tbe west ; and the town of Kuláchi is their head.
quarters. They were originally a poor pawindah and pastoral tribe,
but they now cultivate more largely than any other Dera Ismáíl Patháng.
They reached the height of their prosperity about the middle of the
18th century, but lost their eastern possessions some seventy years later,
they being confiscated by Nawab Muhammad Kbán, the Saddozai
governor of Leiah. They still engage in the pawindah traffic. They
are lawless, brutal and uncivilised ; and their hereditary Khán has but
little power. Mr. St. George Tucker thus described their sections:-
" The Gandapurs profess to be all descended from one or two original
ancestors, but there is no doubt, as in most similar cases, that other
* Further information will be found in Mr. Brandreth's Jhelum Settlement Report, 1865,
$$ 55 to 58 ; Mr. Thomson's Settlement Report, 1883, $ 57 ; and in Punjab Government
Polections, New Sories, No. XXIII, 1887.



278
Gandhi-Gangushahi.
tribos and families have been associated with them from time to time,
who all claim now to be of the original stock. They are divided into
six main divisions or nallahs (valloys*). Most of these nallohs have a
single generic name, covering all the men of that nallah; but there are
also joint nallahs, in which two altogether distinct sections are combined,
each having & generic name of its own. The hereäitary chiefship
rested at first with the Brahímzai nallah, but the Brahím zais having
been very much weakened by losses in a fight against the Bábars, the
chiefship was transferred some 200 years ago to the Hamránzai, who
have retained it ever since. A zád Khán was the first Hamránzai Khán.
It was in his time that the Gandapors seized Takwára from the
Drískhels. Kuláchi was soon afterwards settled by fugitive Baloch
from Dera Fateh Khán, from whom it obtained its name. Those
eventually returned to their own country, and Kuláchi became the head
GANDHI, a sf the Ganded to their from whomard
GANDHI, a Ját tribe, which seems to be chiefly found in the same tract with
the Mángat.
GANDHÍLÁ, fem, -AŅ, a low vagrant tribe, said by Elliott to be " a few degrees
inore respectable than the Bawarias," though in the Punjab their posi-
tions are perhaps reversed. They wander about bare-headed and bare.
footed, beg, work in grass and straw, catch quails, clean and sharpen
knives and swords, cut wood, and generally do odd jobs. They are said
to eat tortoises and vermin. They also keep donkeys, and even engage
in trade in a small way. It is said that in some parts they lead about
performing bears ; but this is doubtful. They have curious traditions
which are reported from distant parts of the Province, regarding a king.
dom which the tribe once possessed, and which they seem inclined to
place beyond the Indas. They say they are under a vow not to wear
shoes or turbans till their possessions are restored to them.
GANDO, a small Ját clan found in Jind. It has bakhúás at Mádpar, and at
these it worships its jatheras at weddings and on the Diwáli.
GÁNDÍ, one who extracts and sells otto (itr), whereas the atár makes 'arak
not itr.
GANDIA, a tribe of Játs found in Dera Gházi Khán. Like the Chándia Baloch
they present offerings to the descendants of Shámji, though Muhammad.
ans, and are also called Rang Rangia. Soe under Gosain and Chhabih-
wála.
GANG, a tribe which, like the Munds, is generally reckoned as Awán, though
the leaders of the admittedly Awáns do not allow tho claim. It is sur-
rounded by Awáns on all sides and may be an affiliated clan (see Jhelum
Gazetteer, 1904, p. 101).
GÁŅGAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GAŅGO, an Aráío clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
GANGUSHÁBÍ.-A Sikh sect, founded by Gangú cr Gangadás, a Basí
Khatri of Gashshankar. Sikh history relates that he presented four
pice weight of gur-all his worldly, wealth-to his Gurú, Amardás, and
was sent to preach in the hill country. He founded a shrine at Daun
near Klarar, and his great-grandson, Jowáhir Singh, founded one of still
greater fame at Khatkar Kalán in Jullupdur. Mahí Bhagat of
* Of, the thoks among tho Meos.



Ganj-Gárá.
279
Mahísar was another celebrated leader of this sect. The Gangusháhís
possess Guru Amar Dás' bed and having refused initiation from Gurú
Govind Singh were excommunicated by him.*
GANJ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GANJ-BAK#381.-A Sikh sect, few in numbers, of which nothing is known, t
except that Ganj-bakhsh was a faqir of Gurdáspur who received a
blessing from Gurú Amar Dást.
Ganwán, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán. :
GANWANEŅ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GANWEN, a Ját clan found in the centre of Shujábád tahsil, Multán district,
where they settled from Delhi in Maghal times.
GÁNWARÍ, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GÁBOR GÁRH AND SAMAL OR SÁMIL.--The two factions into which the Patháns
and other tribes of the North-West Frontier were, and to some extent
still are, divided. Many legends designed to explain the origin of
these factions are current. When Rájá, runs an old tradition, ruled
in the modern North-West Fruntier Province his wazír Gomal governed
Balochistán as far as Wazírístán as his viceroy. Gomal had two
nephews, Sámal and Gárh, between whom the country was divided.
Hence Sámal comprises the Spín and Tor gund tribes bordering on
Khost in Afghánistán, and the Zakká Khel, Aka Khel, Sih Pai. Damrai.
the Tamam Khatak of Tíráh, the Afridi country, and generally speaking
all the tribes of the Kohát and Bannu districts. Gár or Gárh
comprises the Qamar Khel, Kúki Khel, Adi Khel, Aya Khel, and many
villages of the Orakzai, Músázai, Múla Khel, Mushtai, Bazotai, Alisher-
zai. etc. According to Cockerell these factions are not now of much
importance, having been superseded by the more rabid enmity between
Sunni and Shi'a, but Major James writing in 1870 described the feud
between them as still very strong and bitter and merely supplemented
by that between the two sects. He assigned to the Sámil half the
Orakzai and Bangash, the Mohmand, Malik-dín Khel, Sipah (Sih Pai).
and Kawr, with the Zakká, Aká and Adam Khels of the Afridis, aná
to the Gár the rest of the Orakzai and Bangash and the Khalíl, with
the Kúki and Qambar Khels of the Afrídis. The tradition, accepted
by Ibbetson, that the factions originated in the fratricidal enmity of the
two sons of the ancestor of the Bangash, who were called Bun-kash
or 'root.destroyers : on that account, derives support from the fact
that the two great branches of the Bangash are called Gári and
Sárnilzai, but how the feud spread as far north as the Mohmands and
Khalíls does not appear.
GARÁ, Garrá, a term applied to any doghlá, or person whose parents were
of different castes, in the Hill States, especially to the issue of a
Muhammadan Rájput by a wife of another caste. ſ? whether=garri of
Jammul (2). A village of Gayr Brahmans converted to Muhammadanism
the Kuklár the metho Zakka, ohmand, Missigned merely
• Maclagan, $ 87.
| Murray's History of the Punjab, I, p. 121. -
* Maclagan, $ 98. Another Gadjbakhsh, a Muhammadan, has a shrine outside the Bhati
Gato at Labore.



280
Garalwál-Gathánahi
in Gurgaon call themselves Gaur Shaikhs but are sty led Gárá by their
neighbours, and a proverb says :-
Khet men járá gánu men Gára,
“ As coarse grass tends to spread in the field, so á Gápá tries to
convert his fellows."
(3). In Karnál the descendant of a Rájput by a widow (of his own or
any other caste) married by karewa is called Gárá.
GARALWÁL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GARDEZI, a branch of the Husaini Sayyids, also called Baghdadi. They
once owned a large part of the Sarai Sidhu tahsil of Multán. The
Zaidís are an offshoot of the Gardezís. (See The Roces of the
N.-W. P. of India, Vol. I, p. 125).
Gareí, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Garewál, an important Ját tribe in Ludhiana, which claims to be of sáú
or gentle status. Hindu Garewal are also found in Montgomery.
GARA, a Baloch clan (agricultu ral) found in Montgomery.
GARHÁR, a Ját clau (agricultural) fou od io Multán.
GARAwí, a non-Pathán tribe which with the Torwáls holds the Swát Kobistán.
The Garhwís speak a languago of their own called Garhwí. See under
Torwál.
GARNO, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
GARRI, or Gádi, a small class of milkmen and cultivators in Karnál, known
as Gaddi in Delhi.
Gárrí, a low caste of strolling actors and mountebanks, mostly Hindu
who have their head-quarters in Jaimu but are not infrequently found
in the Bajwát, or plain country under the Jammu hills, in Sialkot.
According to Sir Dunlop Smith the Gárrís are perhaps hardly actors'
or mountebanks,' but rather wandering minstrels like the Mírásís,
only they do not keep to one place like the latter. They stroll about
in very swall hands and do not visit the Punjab proper. They gener-
ally visit the Rájput villages in the Sialkot and Zaffarwal tahsils about
the time of the kharif barvest, very rarely at the rabi. They say
they are Hindus, but their standing is low and their religious beliefs
are hazy. They invariably have a zither-like instrument called a king.
They speak the Dogar dialect, which the Játs do not understand, and
their songs generally relate to a great ancestress, the recital of whose
history is said to have a wonderful effect on the women. They occasion-
ally dance to their own singing. They are not at all, criminal, and
their women are fairly respectable. They marry within the tribe only.
Gar, a Mahammadan Ját clan (agricultu ral) found in Montgomery.
GATAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GATHWÁLÁ (from gatha, a burden). A Ját tribe, Once carriers by trade.
It holds 10 villages in tahsil Jind, whither they migrated from
Húláná, a village in the Gohána tahsil of Rohtak. They have Bairagis
us their jatheras.
GATRÁNAH, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.



Gaur-Gaurwah
281
ate de aer la nith the main this
GAUR, a variant of Gávr or Gabr, 'unbeliever among the Baloch. The
· Gaur gave their name to the town of Gauránı (Dames' Popular Poetry
of the Baloches, p. 163). Cf. also Gibari and Gabr.
Gaux, a group of the Brahmans, confined almost entirely to the eastern
districts, the Punjab Himalayas and the sub-montane as far west as
Gujrat. The Gaurs are generally divided into two classes, adh- or pure
Gaurs, and gattas who are of illegitimate descent. In the Delhi
territory the latter class appears to be called DHARTKRA or Doghla. In
Sirmúr State the adh-Gaurs are said not to intermarry with the gattas.
The adh-Gaurs are themselves sub-divided into chitti and káli kanthi-
wálás, or wearers of white and black rosaries,' a division which is
undoubtedly sectarian. Trans-Giri in this State the highest section of
the Brahmans (and apparently Gaurs) is the Pabuch which does not
intermarry with the Bháțs though its members may eat food cooked
by Bhát girls, yet may not eat it if cooked by a Pabuch. On the
other hand a Pabuch may not eat food cooked by a girl of his own
section if she has been married to a Bhát. The Pabuch refrain from
killing any animal and from eating flesh.
The Gaurs are divided into 36 sásans* or sections which appear to
be exogamous, and every Brahman group similarly divided, as are tho
DAKAUTS, may be taken to be of Gaur origin. It is not at all improbable
that the Khandiwál Brahmans are also a branch of the Gauſs.*
The Tagas of Karnál are certainly Gaurs who have taken to cultiva.
tion, and so apparently are the criminal Tágus also.
The Gauſs of Hissár say they came originally from Bengal,
but more probably they came as parohits or family priests of the various
immigrant tribes among whom they are settled. I As elsewhere they
are fed on the 13th day after death, but will not take offerings of black
colour (kalá dán), nor those made at eclipses (grahn ká dánı or on a
Saturday. They will however accept offerings not only from agricul-
tural tribes but also from Khátís, Kumhárs, Lohárs, Náís, Bairágís
and Jogis, though not from Chúhřás or Chamárs. The great majority
of them have, like the Sársut, adopted agriculture and are not directly
engaged in religious functions. The Gaur is held in peculiarly low
estimation by the people, apart from his religious, status. See also
Gautam.
GAURWAH -(Gaurai or Gaulai appears to be a synonym in Gurgaon)-
term applied generally to any Rájputs, who have lost rank by practising
karewa. S In Delhi however they forin a distinct clan, and though both
they and the Chauhan permit widow remarriage, they are looked upon
as a separate tribe. They are described as noisy and quarrelsome, but
obably they camhom they are sett not take offerings or on a
* The term sásan means originally a grant of land and is still used in that sense in Chamba
(Gazetteer, p. 131), and in Mandi (Gazetteer, p. 20). The process by which the term sásan
came to mean a section of a caste is obscure. The Brahminical gotras are of course still
preserved by the Gauſ and appear to cross-divide the sásans. Both sásans and gotras are
further sub-divided into countless als. Thus the Gaur 'sub-tribe' (zát or ját) contains an
zł. called Indauria, 'from Indaur' who are by gotra Bháradváj and parohits of the Lohán
Játs. The vagueness of the Brahmans in Gurgaon as to their als and gots is however
. astonishing : Gurgaon Settlement Rep., 1872-83, p. 32.
+ Hissár Gazetieer, 1904, p. 78.
Cf. the note on p. 810 infra where it is pointed out that Guda=Thánosar.
$ Of. Gárá.



282
Gautam
Geluikpá.
sturdy in build, and clannish in disposition -in contrast to the Chauhan.
In Gurgaon they are confined almost wholly to the Palwal tahsil; a
few are Muhammadans, but the majority are Hindus.
GAUTAM(A), a rát or group of Brahmans owning a few villages in Gurgaon,
where they are represented by a single got, the Maithal, which has
52 als. The Gautam appears to rank below the Gaur, for the latter
will smoke from the same huqqa as a Gauſ, but in smoking with a
Gautam or Chaurasia will remove the inonth piece and use his hand in
its stead. Gaurs too will drink from a Gautam's brass vessel, but not
from his earthenware, whereas, they say, a Gautam will drink from a
Gaur's. But the Gautams deny this.
GAWÁR, see Gwár. Also a rustic, a clown, an ignorant person : fem. •ní.
Punjabi Dicty., p. 375.
GAWARIA, a small Ját got (? from gai, cow), found in tahsil Jind.
Gawásí, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Gázak,=Dhobi.
Gazdár, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Gazzi, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
GEDRI, see under Gidri.
Gegí, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Geolan, au Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Gelan, (1) a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán; (2) an Aráin clan
(agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Gelukpá, virtuous 'ones,' a Buddhist order founded about A. D. 1420 by
Tsonkhapa, the first Grand Láwa of Gahldap, and now found cbiefly in
Tibet, where both the Dalai 'and Tashi Lámas belong to it. The monks
are bound to celibacy, and certainly refrain from marriage, though ia
the years of their novitiate they are said to be by no means immacalate.
Tbeir outward mark is a yellow cap.
The founder Tsonkhapa belonged to a school of reformers of whom
Bromston (pron. Tomton) is the best known (circ. 1150). Bromston
lived in the Ki monastery and the tradition of his residence there
was preserved till the time of Csoma de Kosroes, about 1820, but
it was lost during the Dogra War in 1842. Mr. Francke thinks that
de Kosroes rightly identified Ki with the celebrated Hons of Rvasgengs
(pron. Ráreng). Bromston's name is preserved in Bromston-chu
Tomton-chu) and Bromstonsna, the stream and rock of Bromston'
near Ki. He apparently founded the Kadempa sect in the Ráreng
monastery and either there or at Ki Tsonkhapa studied his works*
and inaugurated a new reformation. His object was to restore the
ancient Buddhist faith and purify it from Tantraism. His brethren
were to be celibates and use du wine. He even attempted to restore
the priestly garb of the ancient Indo-Buddhist church, and to this
day the Gelukpa novices (yetshul) wuar nothing but yellow, at least
in Spiti : but Lámáism as usual proved too strong and though probably
the dress of the whole community was yellow the distinctive colour
* Tsongkhapa eliminated the rgiút, the Sanskrit Tantra from the Kagiúr, whereas the
Hingmapa still accept it,



Gendas-Ghanghas.
283
is now red, but a fully initiated brother (gelang) still wears yellow
in his cap and girdle, and on bigh festivals monks of high degree
wear yellow silk coats underneath their roa shawls. To some extent
Tsonkhupa's reforms produced a higher moral standard, and the
Gelukpas are in name celibate everywhere, though probably not proof
against temptation in the polyandrous bomes where their summers
are spent. In Spiti they do not even profess to be teetotalers.
The Ki, Lbao(t)rai Gonpa near Dankhar, and Tábo monasteries in
Spiti belong to this order, and Ki keeps up an intimate connexion
with Tibet, those of its monks who aspire to high rank being obliged to
qualify at the dGuvai Khamszan monastery in Tashi Lunpo near
Shigatze which is ruled by the Panchan Láma, the acknowledged head
of the order.
GENDAS, a small Ját tribe or got found in tahsils Sangrúr and Dadri of Jind,
Its name is said to be derived either from gandása, an axe, or Gendwas,
a village in tahsil Hissár.
GhAG, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
GHAGAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GHAGRAD, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GAAGHREL, a woman who wears a petticoat, a respectable woman. But cf.
Gagrel.
Ghái, Gaal, a caste of grass-cutters found in Kángra Proper and in Núrpur,
where they also ply rafts and skins on the Beas. Apparently also
called Ghásí.
GHALLU, a tribe found in the south-west corner of the Multán district since
the Ain-j-Akbari was compiled. It is also numerous in the kár láris
of Bahawalpur and Ahmadpur of Bahawalpur State, as especially in
the peshkári of Uch. Its eponym was a Hindu Ráth (Rájput), con-
verted to Islám by Makbdúm Jaháníán. From his seven sons sprang
as many septs, viz., the Hanbírpotre, Ghanúnpotre, Dipál, Jháubú,
Kúrpál, Kánji and Gujj. The Ghallus in Bahawalpur are both land-
owners and cultivators and their tenants and servants are the Gbuláms,
once their slaves, a small tribe of unknown origin.
Ghalo, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Gaalo KANJANARAH, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Moltán.
GHALOWAKNÚN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Ghaman, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
GHAMÁN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
GÐAMÁR, -YÁR, -IÁR, fem. -árí, etc., Gaumár, fem. -í, -ní, see Kumhár,
GHAMBYE, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Għan, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GAANERA, a clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
GHANGHAS, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Karnál.
It is also found in Jind tahsíl. Folk-etymology derives its oame from the
tale that its eponym once asked a smith for an axe, but got instead
a ghan (sledge-hammer) which he was told to shape into an axe by
rubbing (ghisná) it.



284
Ghanghra-Ghatwál.
.
GHANGARA, a Hindu Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
GHANIERE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
GHARámí, a thatcher, a maker of lattice work. The Gharámis form a small
caste, probably distinct from the Jhínwars, and work in grass, etc.
Gharáſíá, a miller, also GHUB..
GHARHANA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
GHARIÁLÁ, a moulder.
GAAĶIÁLI(A), fom. -AN, one whose business it is to strike the hour on a
gong (ghariál).
Gøarshin, in Pashto originally Kharsín, a tribe of Sayyids affiliated to the
Miánas but resident among the Ushtarána Shiránís. Its progenitor,
surnamed the Gharshín,* belonged to the same family as the Sayyids
of Uch, and it furnished more than one saint to the Afgháns Malik
Yár Parán, a contemporary of Gliás-ud-dín, Balban, was a Gharshín,
and others are found near Kandahár, among the Kákar and Músá
Khel Panni Pathans and in Uch and other places in Baháwalpur.
GĦARWÁL, a tribe of Rájputs, found in the upper part of Kahúta, in Ráwal-
pindi. They claim descent from one Pír Kálá, a son of Rájá Mall (ances-
tor of the Janjúás). He married Kaho Rání when he came to those
hills, and named the ilaqa in which he settled Kahrú after her. Hence
his descendants were called Kahrwál or Gharwal. The tribe is numer.
ous and important, living in a picturesque country. The Dulál is a
branch of this tribe.
Ghásí, fem. -AR: also ghássí, a grass-cutter, in Multán; the term is also
used in the hills. Cf. ghasiárá, fem, -í, -an, a grass-cutter. Neither
appear to form distinct castes.
GAATTÚ, a Mubammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
GAATWÁL, one of the Ját tribes of the South-East Punjab. They trace their
origin from Garh Ghazni, and place that city in the Deccan and not in
Afghánistán. They claim descent from Saroha Rajputs. Their head.
quarters are at Ahulána in the Gohána tahsil of Rohtak, and they
occupy the country between it and the Jumpa, being numerous in the
nurth of Delhi and to the south of Karnál. Ahulána is said to have been
founded 22 generations ago, and gives its name to the Haulánia faction.
The Ghatwal are often called malak, a title they are said to have
obtained as follows :-
"In the old days of Rajput ascendancy the Rájputs would not allow
Játs to cover their heads with a turban, nor to wear any red clothes, por
to put a crown (mor) on the head of their bridegroom, or a jewel (nat)
in their women's noses. They also used to levy seignorial rights from
virgin brides. Even to this day Rájputs will not allow inferior castes
to wear red clothes or ample loin clothes in their villages. The Gbat-
wáls obtained some successes over the Rajputs, especially over the
Manda hárs of the doáb near Deoban and Manglaur, and over those of
the Bágar near Kálánaur and Dádri, and removed the obnoxious pro-
Vadon.
Argin from Garhat tribes of the Souiltur
* The name is said to be derived from ghar, a mountain and shin, green or fruitful,
because while residing about Bora and Peshín, two Sayyids, at the request of the herdsmen
of the tribes, solicited divine aid to turn their bleak and rugged hills into grass.covered
ranges.



Ghaunrar-Gheye.
285
Chatwalme to be calledalled Rai Sal; in
hibitions. They thus acquired the title of malak (master) and a red
turban as their distinguishing mark; and to this day a ját with a
rod pagļi is most probably a Ghatwál.”
Mr. Fanshawe says that the title is a mere nickname conferred
by a malik or chief called Rái Sál; yet in Rohtak they appear
generally to be called malak rather than Ghatwal.* In Jind the
Ghatwal reverence Bairagís as their jatheras. In Hissár the Brahmans
of Depál are their parohits to this day, because their ancestor rescued
the only surviving woman of the tribe, after the Rájputs of Kalánaur
had blown up all the rest of the Ghatwáls, who had defeated them.
GHAUNRAR, à sept of Rájputs, descended from Míán Bajokhar, son of
Saugar Chand, 16th Rájá of Kahlúr.
GHAZLÁNI, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
GHEBA, a tribe of Rájput status in the Attock district. Tradition makes the
Gheba, Siál and Tiwána descendants of Gheo, Saino and Teno, the three
sons of Rái Shankar Punwár.t The Siál and Tiwána appear to admit
the relationship, and it is not at all impossible that this group of Rajput
tribes may be of Punwár origin. The Gheba are said to have come to
the Punjab some time after the Siál and Tiwána, and to have settled in
the wild hilly country of Fatahjang and Pindigheb in Attock. Here
they held their own against the Awáns, Gakkbars, and neighbouring
tribes till Ranjit Singh subdued them. The Jodra are said to have come
from Jammu, or according to another story from Hindustán, whence
also Colonel Cracroft says that the Gheba traditions trace that tribe,
and to have held their present tract before the Gheba settled alongside
of them. They now occupy the eastern half of the Pindigheb, and the
Gheba the western half of the Fatabjang tahsil in Rawalpindi, the
two tracts marching with each other. The Gheba is also said to be in
reality a branch of the original Jodra tribe that quarrelled with the
others, and took the name of Gheba which till then had been simply a
title used in the tribe ; and the fact that the town of Pindigheb was
built and is still held by the Jodra, and not by the Gheba, lends some
support to the statement. The history of the Gheba family is told at
pages 538 ff. of Sir Lepel Griffin's Panjab Chiefs. Colonel Cracroft
described the Gheba as" a fine, hardy race of men, full of fire and
energy, not addicted to crime, though their readiness to resent insult
or injury, real or imagined, or to join in hand-to-hand fights for
their rights in land, and their feuds with the Jodra and alpiál are
notorious."
Gori, one who sells ghi : a section of the Khatrís.
GARTAL-PANTHI, -ís, one who has no religious guide, a bad man.
GAEYE, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
* There are in several parts of India, especially in Monghyr and its neighbourhood, tribes
of low-class Rájputs called Ghatwal, who hold or held assignments of revenue on condition
of defending the gháțs or passes in the hills by which the hill tribes were wont to make
predatory incursions into the plains below.
† An amended genealogy is given at page 520 of Griffin's Panjab Chiefs.
# But Cracroft also noted that other tales assign to the Ghebas the same origin as the
Khooras, now cultivators in the tract,



286
The Ghilzais.
GHILZAI, GĦALZAI, a tribe of the Matti branch of the Pathans, and till the rise
of the Darráni power, the most famous of all the Afghán tribes. The
official spelling of the name is Ghaleji at Kábul and Kandahar. They
first rose ipto notice in the time of Mahmúd Gbaznavi, whom they
accompanied in his invasions of India. Not long afterwards they
conquered the tract between Jalálábád and Kelát-i-Ghilzai, and spread
east and west over the country they now hold. Io the beginning of
the 18th century they revolted against their Persian rulers, established
themselves under Mír Wais as independent rulers at Kaodahár, and
overran Persia. But a quarter of a century later they were reduced
by Nadir Shah, and their rule disappeared, to be succeeded not long
after by that of the Durráni. They are of the same stock as the Isá
Khel and Lodi Pathans, as the following pedigree table shows :
Qais-i.Abdur Rashid or Shaikh Báit.
въi мito
Shah Husain, a Shansabáni Tájik of Ghor.
GHALZAI.
Ibrahim or Lodai.
Niází.
Dotarní.
Siární.
IsÁ KAEL.
Prangi.
.
Ismail.
Mabpál.
Búr.
Núhárni.
Mamá. Mayal.
Tatór.
Shaikh of Patakh. Húd. Marwat.
2 Adole
A80.
Sin or Yasin.
Músá,
Isot or sot.
Yasin or Yúnas.
Haidar or Khizr.
Yakub.
Daulat.
Hassan.
Tradition derives the name Gbalzai from ghalzoe, the 'illicit (first-born)
son of Bíbí Máto by Sháh Husain, whom she afterwards married. Her
descendants first dwelt in the Shilghaſ territory, south of Ghazni, but
when the Gbalzai became numerous, they drove the Niázís to the east-
ward, and the Andar branch of the Ghilzais still hold Shilghar. Other
branches are the Hotak or Hotakí, Kharoţi, Nasir or Násiri, Sulimán
Khán, Taraki and Tokli. Of these the Kharoţi and Nasir however
do not appear to be true Ghilzais, but to be descendants of one of
the several Turk tribes located on the western frontiers of the Ghazai
kingdom, towards the Afghánistán, by the Turk feadatories under the
Sámánis and the Turk Sultáns of Ghazní. The Hotaki is the royal



The Ghirths.
287
clan, and from it sprang the Háji, Wais,* and the Sultáns, Mahmúd,
Ashraf and Husain. The Ghilzai are found almost exclusively as
nomads in the North-West Frontier Province and the Punjab, and form
with the Lodi Patháns the bulk of the PAWINDAH folk.
GHIRTH.-The Ghirths fill much the same position in Kángra proper and the
hills below it as do the Kanets in the parts to the east. They correspond
also to the Bahti in the eastern and the Cháng in tbe western portion
of the lower ranges. All three intermarry freely, and were considered
by Sir James Lyallas identical. The Gbirths of Kángra and Hoshiar-
pur were thus described by Barnes :-
“My previous remarks (see Ráthi) will have introduced the reader to the Ghirths. They
form a considerable item in the population of these hills, and in actual numbers exceed any
other individual caste. With the Ghirths I have associated the few Játs that reside in this
district, and the Chángs, which is only another name for Ghirths, prevalent about Haripur
and Núrpur. They amount altogether to 111,507 souls. The Ghirths are sub-divided
into numerous sects. There is a common saying that there are 360 varieties of rice, and
that the sub-divisions of the Ghirths are equally extensive, the analogy arising from the
Ghirths being the usual cultivators of rice. The Ghirths predominate in the valleys of
Pálam, Kángra, and Rihlu. They are found again in the Hal Dún, or Harípur valloy.
These localities are the strongholds of the caste, although they are scattered elsewhere in
every portion of the district, and generally possess the richest lands and the most open
spots in the hills. The Ghirths belong to the Sudra division of Hindus, and this fact
apparently accounts for the localities wherein they are found. The open valleys, although
containing the finest lands, are also the only accessible portions of the hills. The more
refined castes preferred the advantages of privacy and seclusion, although accompanied by
& sterner soil and diminished returns. They abandoned the fertile valleys to less fastidious
classes, whose women were not ashamed to be seen nor to work in the fields, and the men
were not degraded by being pressed as porters.
The Gbirths are a most indefatigable and hard-working race. Their fertile lands yield
double crops, and they are incessantly employed during the whole year in the various
processes of agriculture. In addition to the cultivation of their fields, the Gbirth women
carry wood, vegetables, mangoes, milk and other products to the markets for sale; many
sit half the day wrangling with customers until their store is disposed of. The men are
constantly seized for begar, or forced labour, to carry travellers' loads, or to assist in the
various public buildings in course of construction. From these details it will be perceived
that the Ghirths have no easy time of it, and their energies and powers of endurance must
be most elastic to bear up against this incessant toil.
To look at their frames, they appear incapable of sustaining such fatigue. The men are
short in stature, frequently disfigured by goitre (which equally affects both sexes), dark
and sickly in complexion, and with little or no hair on their faces. Both men and women
have coarse features, more resembling the Tartar physiognomy than any other type, and
it is rare to see a handsome face, though sometimes the younger women may be called
pretty. Both sexes are extremely addicted to spirituous drinks. Although industrious
cultivators, they are very litigious and quarrelsome; but their disputes seldom lead to
blows; and though intemperate they are still thrifty,-a Ghirth seldom wastes his substance
in drink. In their dealings with one another they are honest and truthful, and altogether
their character, though not so peaceable and manly as the Ráthi, has many valuable and
endearing traits. The Ghirths being Sudras do not wear the janeo or thread of caste.
They take money for their daughters, but seldom exchange them. The younger brother
takes his brother's widow; if she leave his protection, he was entitled by the law of
the country to her restitution, and under us he should at all events receive money
compensation."
* Mír Wais Hotaki gained possession of Kandahár in 1708-9 and on his death in 1720
was succeeded by his brother Abdul-Aziz, but he was speedily deposed and Mír Wais'
elder son Shah Mahmúd raised to power. He subdued Persia in 1722.23 and was there
succeeded by his cousin Sháh Ashraf, but this ruler was overthrown by Nadir Shah.
Meanwhile Shah Husain, Mahmúd's brother had become ruler of Kandahår and he not
only refused Shih Ashraf an asylum, but had him put to death. Sháb Husain reduced
the Shál district and Fúshang, which the Baloch chief Mihráb Khán had annexed, and
caused Dera Gházi Khán to be sacked by a detachment-a disaster from which Gházi
Khán's family never recovered.



288
The Ghirth septs,
The Ghirths are said to be of Rajput origin by mixed marriages or
illegitimate intercourse. They are essentially agricultural, and the
proverb says :—"As the rice bends in the ear the Ghirth lifts his head.”
Their social position is low. “You can no more make a saint of a
Ghirth than expect chastity of a buffalo," and they practise widow
marriage, for “ You can't make a Gbirthni a widow, any more than you
can turn a hill buffalo into a barren cow.”
Folk etymology derives Ghirth from ghi, because Shiv made them out
of ghi. In Hoshiarpur Ghirths are called Báhti.* In Hindustán they
are called Kúrmi. Cháng is the Punjábi name, and Ghirth the Pahári
word.
The Ghirths have few large sub-divisions. The eight largest are the
Kandal, Bhardwaj, Pathári, Chhabru, Reru, Badiál, Chhora, and Bhattu.
Bliárdwa; (a Brahminical gotra), is also found as an al among the Brah-
mans of Chamba.t Chhábru is found only in Hoshiarpur, and Chbora
and Bhattu only in Kángļa. The others occur in both Districts. But
the Ghirths say that they have a large number of als or septs-360 in
all. A great part of these are named after villages. Others are
named after trades, occupations, etc., etc. A very few are possibly
totemistic in origin.
Among these septs occur the following names :-
A.-Names of animals or plants :-
(1) Dharé, fruit of the wild (4) Gidar, jackal.
fig.
(5) Gadobari, a kind of bird.
(2) Ghorá, horse.
(6) Garúrí, an animal like & small
(3) Khunlá, a kind of bird. /
pig.'
B.-Names of occupations or nick names :-
(1) Surangiálá, minor. 1 (10) Saini, vegetable-seller.
(2, Nandé, nandhi, dumb. (11) Hutlá, stammerer.
(8) Mórmár, peafowl-hunter. (12) Kháugar, khánsi, a cough.
(4) Jókhnú, weighman. (13) Lahú, charred or burnt.
(5) Paniárí, paniárá, water- (14) Topá, bought for a topá or 2
man.
seers of grain.
(6) Masand, long-haired (15) Kumbár, potter.
(said to be its meaning). (16) Nául, neolú.
(7) Lakriá, woodman. (17) Patbrála, founded by a leaf-
(8) Ghorá, jockey.
seller (pattá, leaf).
(9) Hariálá, born on the
Riháli or 3rd Bhadon.
C.-Names of colours :-
(1) Kálá, black.
(3) Nílá, blue,
(2) Kabrá, red-brown.
* Bauhtia appears to be a variant of Bahti. Possibly, this suggests, Báhti means simply
ploughman.'
+ According to the account of the Ghirths compiled by the late Mr. A, H. Gunter, C.8., the
Brahminica gotras are preserved but each comprises a number of als, e.g., the Kundál got(ra)
includes the Cháng, Siál, Thetar and Tholi záts (= als), the Konsal got includes the
Panihári, the Tul got the Patákú al, and the Kásab the Kattu. The gots, it is distinctly
stated, aro named after common ancestors who were rishis.'



Ghirth observances.
289
D.-(1) Khéșa, founded by a woman whose child was born under a
khêr tree.
(2) Banyánú, founded by a woman whose child was born under a
ban or oak.
(3) Daddá, founded by a woman whose child was born near a
bamboo, and laid on the tree.
(4) Khunla, an animal of some kind. The name was given to a
child as a token of affection. Hence his descendants are
still called by the name.
(5) Ladháriá, from ladhár, a kind of tree.
(6) Gburl, a wild goat; so called because its progenitor cried like
one.
(7) Khajúrá, date-palm (cf, the Nagarkotia Brahman al of this
name); 80-called because its founder was born under a date-
palm.
(8) Khattá, from khattá, a kind of tree : for a similar reason.
Other exogamous sections (gots) are Balaru, Banjára, Barol,
Chakotra, Bhút, Diálu, Hangaria, Jalarich, Kathe, Narotra, Panjla,
Pangáu, Panyária, Sákre, Siál, Thimbu, Thirku, etc., all of unknown
derivation.
In the Rajput hypergamous system the Ghirth does not rank very
high for not till the seventh generation cap his daughter become a
queen (Satwin pirhi Ghirthni ki dhî Râni hojati), whereas the Ráthi's
daughter can attain to that position in four generations and even the
Kanet's reaches it in five. But the Rájas could promote a Ghirth to
be a Ráthi, as Sir James Lyall records (Kángļa Sett. Rep., § 73),
The following accounts of the Ghirth social observances are given
as typical of the usages among all the Hindu castes of the Kángra Hills
and not as peculiarly characteristic of the Ghirths. They resemble
generally those in vogue among the Gaddis of Kángra, but the local
variations appear to be endless. These are described in the foot-notes
to the text below
In betrothal the father, mother or uncle, if alive, will tell the youth
to arrange to marry such and such a girl. If these are not alive, he
chooses himself; otherwise he remains passive throughout the arrange.
ments. The father then finds a go-between (rúbárú) who goes to the
girl's parents and makes the proposal to them. If they accept, a day
is arranged for the ceremony of betrothal (nátá). On this day the
rúbárú conducts the boy's father or other guardian (the boy does not
go as a rule*) to the girl's house. He takes with him cream, dehi, in a
* Provided the father has no infirmity rendering the son's assistance necessary, the son
will not accompany him. He will generally accompany any other guardian. If the boy
goes too, he is allowed to stay at the girl's parents' house if the Brahmans declare the
occasion favourable, otherwise he must stay in some other house. The boy's Brahman
may be one of the party. It makes a point of arriving during the particular watch of the
particular day which the Brahman has found to be propitious. He leads the way in,
followed by the father and next relative. The others stay in the enclosure outside. The
things are put down and a rupee in silver and a half anna bit in copper are placed by tho
boy's father in the moveable shrine (called diva dera) of Ganésh on the freshly plastered
chaukah. At the same time the girl's parents put down a tray containing a little gur of



hands to the tacown the graih ks are placed to speaks a wore water in a
290
Ghirth weddings
clay vessel (deháli), grain, gur and clothes for the girl, and two rupees
two pice in cash (and jewels, if rich enough); and if a price for the
girl has been agreed upon, they take that too. When they get to the
house they find a ghará of water and an oil-lamp and a vessel contain-
ing a little gur and ghi in the girl's parents' house, and her parents
waiting for them, but not the girl herself. They put down the grain,
gur and dehi, rupees and pice, and clothes and jewels by the water in a
wicker basket put ready for them, and no one speaks a word. Square
mats made of sugarcane stalks are placed for the deputation. When
they have set down the grain, etc., the boy's party bow with joined
hands to the lamp and water vessel, and dipping their fingers into the
gur and ghi put them in their mouths. Then the boy's party salam
and the girl's party salam, and then all sit down for the first time.
Then the go-between takes the rupees and pice and clothes to the girl
who is with the women in another room, gives the money to her, and
gets down the clothes. Then the rúbárú comes back, and receiving
the girl's price from the boy's father, gives it to the girl's father.
Then the boy's father gives pice to the girl's party's kamins, i. e., the
barber, the parohit (family Brahman) and the watchman. The boy's
party stays till night, when the girl's party entertain him with a meal.
Then the girl's mother calls in other women of the village, and they
sing and the boy's father gives them pice. Next day the boy's party
having breakfasted return home.
From this time until the wedding, which in the case of a virgin is called
biáh, the boy's father sends once a year rice or maize, cream, gur and
clothes for the girl. The person who brings these gifts is entertained
at night by the girl's parents and goes away the next day. The date
of the wedding is arranged by the girl's father.* It may take place
their own. The boy's father puts a half anna in this and tastes the gu?. Ho puts a pice
in the loțá of water (garwi) before the shrine, touches his forehead and bends down to
Ganesh, the girl's Brahman worshipping all the time in the usual way. The girl's mother
puts the jewelry on the girl, and the ceremony is over. The girl's parents take all the
Things brought, including the rupee and pice, into the shrine in the tray, out of which the
girl's mother takes them, and not the girl's father. It is the mother's right. There is a
feast next morning and pice are distributed to the poor, and a few annas to the Brahman,
the dhái of the girl's family and the local watchman. A few pice are also given to the
girl's sisters, if any, and her other female relations.
' * The boy's family Brahman settles the day. About 20 days before the day fixed the
father takes him to the house of the girl's parents, where there is a consultation between
him and their Brahman as to whether the day fixed is also auspicious for the father,
paternal uncle and brother of the boy and girl respectively.
The girl's father puts some rice and guļ and a few blades of drub grass and two pice,
and the boy's father also one anna in copper, into a tray. These are divided by the two
Brahmans who throw out the grass. In the tray the girl's mother also puts the red paste
for making the tíka on the forehead which is used for all religious occasions, except these
connected with death. The girl's Brahman puts the tika on the boy's father's forehead and
then on the foreheads of a few of the bystanders. Both families then make their prepara.
tions and summon their friends and relations to the wedding.
On the day the boy's party, which always includes the Brahman and the family barber,
goes to the girl's house, the boy being carried in a pálki and musicians accompanying. The
boy is dressed in red with a fringe of silk tassels (sera) bound round his turban and
hanging in front of his face. He has been washed and dressed by the barber before
starting. The sera and a pair of shoes and a coat are given him by the boy's maternal
uncle When the party reaches the girl's house they all wait outside until the girl's
Brahman announces that the auspicious moment (the conjunction of two stars, 'lagan") has
arrived. The boy and his Brahman with the barber and a friend who has the custody of
the money for current expenditure go inside. The chaukah with the diwa dera is ready. The
friend puts a rupee and half anna in the shrine while the Brahmais mutter a few words.



Ghirth weddings.
291
when the girl is 7 years old even; there is no limit of age. When the
date of the wedding is fixed the boy's father gives whatever it was
arranged should be then paid, and both parties make preparations for
it. On the wedding day the boy is shaved, washed with butná to make
him clean and dressed in a kwah (red cholú) and a red pagri, red
paijámás and kamarband and sera (tasselled head-dress). Mehndi (the
plant) is put into his hand to make his fingers red, and he is put into
a pálki and taken to the girl's house. The girl's father's nain there
spreads a cloth. On táis cloth the two fathers meet. The girl's father
then gives the boy's father's nain pice, and the boy's father does the
like to the other nain. Tbis is called awarinda or in Punjabi wáranda,
because each of the fathers waves the pice round the head of the other
before giving them to the barbers. This takes place outside the house,
Then the girl's party takes the boy into the house. Then the girl's
parohit reads the Véd mantar over the couple. Then they go into the
sahn and put four poles previously adorned into the ground, and place
others joining their tops. The boy and girl are then set underneath,
and more mantars are read. Then the girl and boy walk four times
round the poles with their clothes tied together (linjri). The marriage
ceremony is now complete. Then the parties feast at the bride's
house, but the women are not present. Then behind the pardá the
bride's head is anointed with chaunk. Then either on that day or the
next the bridegroom takes the bride to his father's house, if it is near
enough. Perhaps the girl's barber and the midwife may accompany
The girl's mother takes the rupee and half anna. A blanket is spread inside the outer
room. The boy and girl sit facing each other on it with the boy's barber supporting him
and the girl's barber's wife supporting her, and the respective Brahmans facing each other
on the two other sides. Both read the service. The barber's wife puts the boy's cloak over
the pair and the barber lifts the sera from his face and the barber's wife her cloak from
the girl's, so that they can see each other. The boy takes the ring off the little finger of his
right hand and puts it on the little finger of the girl's right hand. The cloak over the pair
is removed and the girl's face hidden again. Some guļ mixed with ghi is put by the girl's
mother in a tray and the boy takes some, after which the barber's wife gives some to the
girl. The friend with the money bag puts two pice into the tray. These are taken by the
barber's wife. The boy comes out to his relations and the girl goes into the inner room
among the women. After all have refreshed themselves four sticks with small cross-sticks
at the top are fixed in the ground in the enclosure to form a small square in which 5 or 6
can sit. The barber's wife makes a figure (chaunk) with flour on the ground and a small
heap of grain at each of the two points marked with a cru88, and these heaps are covered
with baskets. The boy sits on one basket, and the girl on the other supported by their
Brahmans, the barber and his wife, respectively, the Brahmads being further off than the
barber and his wife. A fire is lit at the point marked with a double cross. The Brahmans
put rice soaked in water and ghi on the fire. Tho girl's mother brings a tray containing a
little rice and a lotá filled with water and puts them down by her Brahman in worship.
He throws soaked rice over them and gives them to the boy's Brahman, who puts them in
front of the boy. The girl's mother or father then brings another tray withia little rice
in it and an empty basket and puts them down by the girl's Brahman, and the girl's
parents put into the tray whatever jewelry they intend to give to their daughter and
The Brahman bands the tray to the boy's Brahman who puts the jewelry down in front of
the boy and returns the tray to the girl's Brahman.
Friends and relations are then called to bring their presents, and they put money in the
tray, which is then offered to the girl by her Brahman The girl takes out as much as she
can with two hands, and this is handed over to the boy's Brahman. The remainder in the
tray belongs to the girl's parents In the same way presents of cloth are put in the basket
and these belong to the girl's parents Next morning the barber and Farber's wife again
show the couple's faces to each other under the cloak as before ; but this time they are
sitting on the two baskets, and the girl has all the jewelry on. The boy puts another ring
on the girl's finger. They separate again as before, and the ceremonies are over. In the
evening the girl will be taken off in a pálki, the boy preceding her in his pálki.



292
Ghirth inheritance.
her, but none of her other people. The bride and bridegroom are
brought into the house and are set before a lighted lamp and ghara of
water to which they bow with hands joined. They are then given ghi
and gúr to eat, and the bridegroorr.'s marriage garments are taken off.
Then the bridegroom takes the bride to his mother. Then the bride,
the barber, the midwife and the people who have carried the bride's
gifts (given by the bride's parents) and the Kahárs are feasted, and
the next day they take the bride home again. If she is not of age,
she sleeps with her mother-in-law. If she has attained puberty, she
sleeps in a separate room with her husband. Then two or three
months later the bridegroom goes to his father-in-law's house and
brings her to his father's house again (hár phérá), and she remains
there, unless the girl's parents send for her again.
The reading of the mantars (lagan) and the going round the poles
(ghúmáná) are the binding and essential parts of the ceremony. Some-
times when the girl's parents are dead the purchase-money is paid and
the marriage completed by the observance of these two ceremonies
alone.
A bride-price is paid, but its amount is not fixed, No regard is
had to the poverty or wealth of the bridegroom. The older the girl,
the more is paid for her. The greater the necessity of the bridegroom,
i. e., the more difficulty he experiences in getting a wife, the more he
mast pay, e. g., if he is a widower.
Widow remarriage is common, Indeed as divorce or rather sale of
wives is frequent* both widows and divorcées remarry. They go
through the simple ceremony called jhanjrárá or widow remarriage,
which consists in the priest patting a red cloak over each party and
knotting the corners together as they sit on a newly plastered
spot (chaunkah) outside the husband's house. The priest then leads
the way in, the woman and the man following bim in that order.
Both then do obeisance at the small sbrine to Ganésh with its offerings
of & loța of water and lamp (chirágh) placed outside, and the ceremony
is over. Before the cloaks are knotted a nose-ornament of gold given
by the husband is taken by the woman from the hands of the barber's
wife and put on. This ornament is the common sign of marriage.
The Ghirths generally think the younger brother has a right to
claim the elder brother's widow, but the claim is not enforceable, nor
apparently ever was. The elder brother cannot marry the younger
brother's widow, but the Ghirths of Palampur say that it is done in the
Kángļa tahsil.
Ghirths follow the Hindu law of inheritance, but, it is said, all
the sons inherit according to the rule of chúndávand, i. e., all the
sons by one wife get as much as all those by another wife.t But
* Divorce is permitted at the pleasure of the husband ; under no circumstances can the
wife claim divorce against his will. It is called chhodni. If a wife be unfaithful, the
abductor pays the husband the price of her bartan (lit. 'user') in the presence of witnesses
and receives a bill of divorce. There is no ceremony. The jhanjrárá takes place with
another man.
+ The Gaddis who live south of the Rávi and are called Chanoti also follow this rule.
Those of Brahmaur observe the pagvand rule. In other words the chúndávand rule is a
local one.



Ghirth funerals.
293
when the property is divided the eldest son will get some weapon or a
head of cattle or a plot of land, with the consent of the brothers, in
token of his being the head of the family. The rest of the immoveable
property will be divided equally. That which is given in this way to
the eldest brother is called jețhúnda.
A Ghirth can adopt any boy of his own tribe, preferably one
descended from an ancestor of his own. If after the adoption a son.
be born to the adopter, the adopted son will receive a share equal to
that of a natural son. If after the adoption offspring be born from
& number of wives, then first the share of the adopted son will be set
apart by the rule of paguand; the remainder of the property being
divided by chúnďávand.
At Ghirth funerals there is always an Achárj Brahman. When the
deceased is laid on the pyre (salbi) the Brahman reads prayers and
then the heir puts the pind or balls of rice on the forehead and breast
of the deceased. The fire is then lighted. For ten days after the
Brahman comes and reads mantars, and pind is thrown down the khad
or ravine daily. The ceremony of srádh is performed on-
(a) The anniversaries of the death of the father, grandfather, and
great-grandfather and their collaterals and are thus obsery.
ed :-Å Brahman (not an Acharj) is called in and makes the
pind. The observer then places rice, pice, cloth, etc., by
the pind, which the Brahman gets. The pind is finally
thrown into water. The Brahman reads the mantars, and a
feast is celebrated. This is done yearly. On the first an-
niversary (bárkhi) and the fourth (chaubarkh) there is a
special celebration when all the Brahmans of the village
must be feasted, and the entertainment is costly.
(6) The suppind (next-of-kin) performs these funeral ceremonies
and commemorations when there is no son, just as if he
were a son. The kiriá takes place for Ghirths 22 days after
the death in all cases. Then besides the balls of rice for
each ancestor of the deceased a large ball is made which is
broken up by the Achárj Brahman and added to the other
balls. This is called supindta.
(c) When a man dies a violent death, there are two kiriás--one in
the heir's house and another, the naráin bal, which takes
place at the Ganges, at Kuruchhetar (in Karnál) or at
Matan in Kashmír or at the house of any of the family
who can afford it. This at Matan always takes place in
the month of Malmas (Lond). At the naráin bal there is no
supindtá.
It cannot be said that the Ghirths have any distinctive belief
or special caste cults.* They affect: (1) Jakh, really a form of Shiv
in the form of a stone, only without the jaléri and generaly
placed among bushes. This is common to all Hindus owning cattle.
The milch cattle are devoted to particular jakhs and offerings
made for them to their particular jakhs when the cattle calve. Any
* Malaghat is said to be the place in the Deccan' whence the Ghirths and their deotá
(godling) camo, and also their god's name. Ajiápál, a tree god, is also mentioned, and
samath the lamp of Gosáin.'



294
Ghirtin' oults..
one may present the offerings, and those who live near the jakh
take it in the case of jakhs in the waste the gwala who happens to be
grazing cattlo near.
(2) Nág or snake worship. Every house or collection of houses
has its rough platform about three feet high, with a fow pillais support.
ing a tbatch, in the enclosure and containing a few flat stones like thin
bricks, with reliefs of one or more snakes cut on them side by side, head
upwards. This must be worshipped, the first thing in the morning, by
every one, by pouring a little water over the stones. Flowers are also
to be seen on them and on the similar reliefs of anoestors which will be
found under the same shelter. Tuesday is the special day of the week
for this worship. The special yearly worship of the spake is on the 5th
of Sáwan (Nág panchmi). All the available milk for the seven preced-
ing days is collected, and on the 5th Sáwan rice is boiled in it. A
chaukah is made inside and outside the threshold with three effigies of
snakes on each, white, red and black-the white of flour, the red of
clay, the black of charcoal. Then follows the usual worship, first with
water, then rice, then with a red tika on the spako's and the worshipper's
own forehead, and incense. The inilk is afterwards distributed. If
there are women in the house, they will do this worship and not the
men. In default of women, the men. Also at the time of the worship
two boys are made to wrestle after giving them as much as they can
eat of the things offered. Then they are dismissed with a fow pice.
This is a test. If the boys go away happy, the god is pleased ; if not,
he is incensed. But this snake worship is not peculiar to the Ghirths.
(3) The Sidhs.-The Sidhs are shrines to Sidhs, i. e., seers, scattered
over the country. The most noted is Dewat Sidh, whose chief shrine
is in the Hamirpur tahsil. Either a small shrine or morely & pillar
is devoted to & representation in relief in stone of the foot of the Sidh
and his staff by the feet; or it may be merely under the shade of a tree
and sometimes very roughly cut. A small pair of toy pattens and a toy
staff may also be seen lying by the relief. In some cases there is a
figure of the Sidb in the shrine. Sidh worship is very general, though
particular mon may choose not to follow it. It is not confined to
Ghirths. The Sidh is worshipped every morning like the other house-
hold gods or at least on Sunday. This is the Sidh's day in the week.
When crops are ripening the shrine of the nearest Sidh is visited on
Sanday. Sidhs are supposed to be special protectors of boys. Ghirths
generally wear the singhi or silver ornament at the throat, which is a
mark of devotion to a Sidh in the district, but the Ghirths say that it
does not specially appertain to & Sidh and may be worn as a mark of
devotion to any deity.
Ghirth women worship the pípal tree, so far only as to pour water
over it on the death of a child. On the 14th day of the moon, s. e.. at
full moon, only sweet food is to be eaten and one must sleep on the
ground. When the moon is seen water is poured out to it standing.
Occasionally one to whom a Brahman has said that the sun is in
opposition to him will set apart the last Sunday of every month, eat
sweet food only, sleep on the ground, and ponr out water to the sun
early next morning.



Ghogha-Ghorewáha.
295
Very occasionally a man becomes possessed, which is shewn by
contortions. The evil spirit may be exorcised by the charms of a
Brahman or there is a temple near Saloh village, at which there is a
spot, the earth of which has a peculiar virtue. The mahant of the
temple, who is a Ghirth, pours some water over a little of the earth and
makes the possessed one eat it, and puts an untwisted thread round his
neck.
Before commencing to plough a Brahman must be consulted as to
the propitious day and the iron of the share is sometimes worshipped.
Also as to sowing to find out from a Braliman which particular sort of
grain it will be propitious to sow first. A little of the particular cort is
gown according to the augury.
Gbirths sacrifice a goat in the first field which ripens in the village
in order to propitiate the gods and prevent disasters, such as hail, etc.
In case of cattle-disease the wooden part of the plough-share is set up
in the enclosure of the house and marked with red and black spots or
tíkas in order that the disease may be averted. Some Ghirths say it is
done by a chéla or other special person who knows how, and is intended,
to keep away evil spirits (bhúts).
Besides the Diwali, Lohri and Dasehra the Ghirths observe tbe fol-
lowing festivals :-
The Birrú on 1st Baisakh. It consists in distributing earthen water
vessels (gharas) to Brahmans and married daughters.
The Sairu on 1st Asauj. It consists in cooking bread and distributing
it just as at the Lobri. It lasts all day, and inarks the ends of the
raing.
The Naula marks the harvesting of the spring crop. Bread is cooked
and eaten and distributed, and those who did not give the gharas at
the Birrú do so now.
Ghirth women wear an ear ornament called dhéđú, The Nái or
barber plays a special trumpet called a nafiri for Ghirths only. It is
exactly like an English bed-room candle-stick with two handles opposite
each other inside iostrad of outside the rim. Ghirths dance at wed-
ding's and festivals facing alternately in different directions and
bending their raised arms inwards and outwards.
GHOGHA, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
GBOREWÁHA, a tribe of Rajputs whose head-quarters are the Jullundur
district, of which they occupy the eastern corner, but they are found in
smaller vumbers in all the adjoining districts. To the west of them are
the Manj, and to the north of them the Náru. They are almost all
Musalmán. They are Kachwáha Rájpats of the Gosal got, descendants
of Kash, the second son of Ráma. They say that Rája Mán,* sixth in
descent from Kash, had two sons, Kachwáha and Hawáha, and that they
are of the lineage of Hawáha. The two brothers met Shahab-ud-dín
Ghori (l) with an offering of a horse, and received in return as large a
territory as tbey could ride round in a day; hence their name. The
division of their country took place while they were yet Hindus, so that
* Of Koç Kurmán, now Udaipar !



296
Ghorgasht Ghori.
their settlement in their present tract was probably an early one. The
Ghorewaha of Ráhon, who are still Hindus, would seem to bave im-
migrated more lately than the rest of the tribe, as they trace their
origin from Jaipur, and their genealogists still live in Kota and Bundi
in Rájputána. Mr. Barkley was disposed to put the Ghorewáha
conquest of their present territory at some five centuries ago. In the
time of Akbar their possessions would seem to have been more extensive
than they are now.
In Hoshiarpur the Ghorewáha hold a báwani or group of 52 villages
around Báláchaur in tahsil Gaphshankar; near Báláchaur they have
adhered to Hinduism ; further north, in the direction of Gashshankar,
they are Musalmáns, but they keep Hindu Brahmans and bards, to
whom they give presents at deaths and marriages, and retain various
other Hindu customs.
The descendants of Hawáha founded 9 chhat or principal villages and
12 makán* (the latter are said to be derived from men of inferior
position to those who founded chhat), and are also divided into 12
muhins named after 12 of the 13 sous of Uttam. The Ghorewaha also
have tika villages, e. g., Bhaddi is the tika of the 12 Ghorewáha villages
round it. Another account says the Ghorewáha presented a river
horse (daryái ghora) to the ruler of the country and obtained the
country in jágír, whence their present name.t
The chhat in Hoshiarpur are four, viz., Gaſhshankar, Pupám, Saros,
and Simli, f all in tahsil Garhshankar, the remaining 5 being in the
Jullundur district. There are two makáns, Samundra and Birámpar
in this tahsil.
The Ghorewáha Rájputs only avoid marriage in their own got and
with a girl of the same locality (muhin). Muhammadan Ghorewáhas
have a further restriction, in that they will not take brides from a
village in which daughters are given in marriage, but intermarriage
within the village is not forbidden. The Ghorewáhas of Garbshankar
and Ráhon are said to give daughters to Náru Rajputs. These, and the
other chhats, take brides from, but do not give daughters to, makán
villages,
GAORGASHT, GIURGA OSHTI, one of the great branches of the Patháns,
descended from Ismáíl, surnamed Ghorghasht, one of the three sons
of Qais-i-Abd-ur-Rashíd the Pațán. Ismáíl had three sons, Dánai
who had four sons, KÁKAR, Panai (PANNI), NÁGHAR and Dáwai (Dáwi)].
MANDÚ, and Bábai, the ancestor of the Báhi Afgháns of Kandahár. The
tribes descended from Dánai are by far the most numerous and include
many of the most powerful tribes of South-Eastern Afghánistán,
Ghorgasht is said to mean leaping and jumping,' 'playing and
romping,' and to have beep bestowed upon Ismáíl as a nickname.
Gaori, a Mughal clau (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
he grea hasht, hood three apai
-
* For these chhat and makán compare the mandis and dheris among the Chibh Rajputs.
+ A variant, from Kapúrtbalá, says that once a bippopotamus covered a mare, Tbe
progeny was presented to Akbar who rode round the land afterwards covered by 1,840
villagos. Ho cast bis spear and it fell at Silánwali,
The Simli Ghorewaua do not give daughters to those of Garbsbankar, the latter
being descendants of the older (tika) brother, Rúp Chand,



Ghoria-Ghugiat.
297
GHORIA or GHWARIÁ KHEL, the Ghwari sept or branch of the Patháng.
It comprised five tribes, the Mohmands, Khalíls, Dáúdzais, Chamkanni
aod Zeráni. It was the rival of the Khashi branch and its enmity
drove the latter to abandon its old seats round Nushki and Gháța and
seek refuge in the territory of the Gigiáni Patháns near Kábul Uzbek
inroads however and the breaking up of the Tímúriá dynasty of Kho-
rásán drove the Ghwaria themselves to the northward, the Dáúdzais
soliciting lands from the Khashis near Pesbáwar, while the Khalíls and
Mobmands obtained considerable power in that valley by allying
themselves with Mirzá Kámrán who then held Kábul in fief under his
brother Humáyún. With his aid these two Ghwaría clans suddenly
attacked the Dilazáks and wrested from them the lands they still
held south of the Kábul river, about 1533-34. On Kámrán's fall
however their power declined and their defeat by the great Khashi
confederation at Shaikh Tapúr in 1549-50 crushed the power of the
Ghwaría Khel for ever. For accounts of the Ghoria tribes see Khalil,
etc., and under Para Chamkanni.
Ghosí, fem. -AN, a caste of people who work as grass-cutters and sell
milk in the United Provinces; but the name also appears to be applied
indiscriminately to any low caste Purbia. The term is said to be only
used in the Punjab for a Muhammadan cowherd or milkman, whether
Gujur, Abír or any other caste; but there are Hindu Ghosís in Delhi
who are gwálas or cowherds by calling and appear to be by origin
Ahírs. It is said that Hindus will buy pure milk from a Musalmán Ghosí,
but will reject it if there is any suspicion of its having been watered by
the latter, as they must not drink water at his hands! The Ghosís
are a purely pastoral group, at any rate in the Punjab. They are,
however, sometimes butchers.
The Muhammadan Ghosís in Delhi are called Gaddí-Ghosís, and those
of Delhi city have a curious legend that they were once invited by
the disciples of a saint to rescue him from a Rájá's tyranny. This
they did, though only armed with sticks and clubs, and as their reward
the saint gave them gowns and doshálás to wear, with green anchals
(veils) for their women, but the latter are no longer in fashion. Still the
men continue to wear a pair of under-kurtas or shirts. The women do not
use the lahnga and kurta or petticoat and shift like other Ghosí
women. These Ghosís are strictly endogamous, and a woman of any
other caste kept by a Ghosí is denied all social intercourse with the
caste, and her partner is not directly invited to feasts or weddings,
though he can attend them if other members of his family do so.
As these Ghosís protected the saint's gaddi or seat they came to be
called Gaddí-Ghosí. The Gaddí-Ghosís of Firozábád are also Muham-
madans, though they claim to be Gaddís from Kángra, and they certainly
have no intercourse with those of Delhi city. They observe parda and
are generally strict Moslems.
GROTTÚ, Ghorú, a polisher or pounder.
GHOWAL, a sept. of Rajputs, descended from Mián Sainki, son of Sangar
Chand, 16th Rájá of Kahlúr.
Gaug, Gaggiar, two agricultural clans found in Sháhpar,



298
Ghulám-Gibari.
GHLÁM.—These men are found in the Peshawar district under the
name of Ghulám-khánazád,* and in Multán under that of Khánazad
simply. The latter may, however, be an error for Khánzádah.
The Pesháwar clans are given as Turkhel Ghulám, and Malekhel.
They are said to be descendants of captives in war who were made
slaves (ghulám), whence their name. They are still chiefly employed in
domestic service, and are generally attached to their hereditary masters,
though some of them have taken to shopkeeping and other occupations.
In Pesháwar the men are also called mrái and the women winza
(concubine). In Bahawalpur the Ghulam are a small tribe, slaves of
the GHALLUS.
GAUMMAN, GHAMMAN, a tribe of Játs, found in Sialkot. It claims descent from
Malkír, second in descent from the Lunar Rajput, Rájá Dalíp of Delhi.
Fifth in descent from him, Jodha had three sons, Harpál, Ranpal and
Sanpal. The descendants of the two former are the Hajaulit Rajputs,
while Sanpál had 22 sons, from whom are descended as many clans,
including Ghumman, the youngest. Sanpal's wives were of various castes
and so his children sank to Ját status. Their Brahmans are Bharwákirs,
whom Muhammadans also consult. Ghumman came from Mukiála or
Malhiána in the time of Firoz Shah, took service in Jammu, and
founded the present tribe. At weddings they worship an idol made of
grass and set within a square drawn in the corner of the house, and
cut the goat's ear and the jandi twig like the Sábi Játs. They also
propitiate their ancestors by pouring water over a goat's head so that
he shakes it off. They are chiefly found in Siálkot, though they have
spread somewhat, especially eastwards, and in that District they have a
Sidh called Dulcbi. In Jind their Sidh is called Dádú or Kálá, and his
samadh is at Nágrá in Pațiála. Beestings are offered to him on the
11th badi every month : offerings are also made at weddings.
Giání, fem. -AŅ, one possessed of knowledge, especially one versed in the
traditional interpretation of the Sikh Granth.
GIÁRÚ, sept or khel of Rajputs in the Simla Hills. To it belong the chiefs
of Koç Kháí, Kumhársain, Khaneți, Karángal and Delach. Said to be
derived from Gayá, whence it came,
Also a sept of Brahmans of similar origin, founded by a Brahman
who married a Hill Brahman's daughter.
GIBARI, GÍBARI, GABARI.-According to Raverty$ Gabar was a town in Bá-
jaur and the Gibaris were the ruling race in that tract, speaking a dia-
lect different from the other tribes. The Afghán historian describes the
people with whom the Afgháns first came in contact in those parts as
speaking two dialects, the Gibari, spoken by that tribe, and the Dari,
spoken by the Mutráwi and Mumiáli.ll The Gibari, with the two last-
named tribes, were septs of the SailMÁNI. See also Gabare, Gabr and
Gaur.
* Mohammad Hayát Kbán in his Haiyát-i-Afgháni states that the Qizilbásh of Kábul
are collectively known as Ghulam-kbáná, and possibly some of the Ghulam-khánazad
may be Qizilbásh.
† Bajauli.
# But another account says they cut the ber instead of the jand.
§ Tabaqát-i-Násiri, . 1043-4. Gabr, fire-worshipper, is a different word,
Notes on Afghánistán, p. 278.



Gidri-Gil.
299
GIDRI, GEDRI, doubtless from gédar, ‘jackal.' Reputed immigrants from
Hindustan and Bíkáner, the Gidris are now found mainly in the Bahá-
walpur State. Closely resembling the Sánsis of the Punjab Proper,
who look down upon them, the Gidris are split up into various camps,
which are supposed to meet once a year in Sáwan at Talla Darya Khán
in Khán Bela police station in Bahawalpur. There all tribal disputes
are settled, just as is done among the Sánsis. The Gidris live by labour,
but also make baskets, cages, fans, etc., and sometimes hawk knives
and cheap jewelry for sale. Each camp has its own headman who exer-
cises quasi-judicial authority in it. The women journey direct from
one camping-place to the next, while the men go further afield in
search of work. Nominally Hindus the Gidris will eat the flesh of any
animal and are regarded as outcasts. The dead are buried without
any obsequies. Marriage is always effected within the tribe, generally
by exchange, but failing that a bride can be purchased for Rs. 15. No
rites are observed save an announcement of the union before relatives,
They speak a language of their own which is allied to the dialects of
Bíkáner and Jaisalmer.
GIGIÁNI, GAGiáni, a Khashi Pathán tribe, descended from Mak, the
third son of Khashai. According to one tradition Mak has two sons,
Hotak and Jírak, and a daughter Gágai or Gagai, whom he gave in mar.
riage to a shepherd. As she had espoused a man of low degree her
descendants styled themselves Gagiảni. Another tradition makes their
progenitor a foundling, who was adopted by Mukai, son of Khashri,
and married to Gagai, a daughter of Túr, the Tarín. By her he had
two sons, Hotak and Jírak, and from their seven sons are descended as
many Gagiáni clans. Mukai's own descendants are known as the
Mukah Khel. Originally settled in territory near Kábul, the Gigiánís,
despite their alliance with the Mughals of Mirza Ulugh Beg, were over-
thrown by the Yusufzaí Pathans in the Ghwara Margha,* near Kábul.
Soon after they made an ineffectual attempt to establish themselves in
Bájaur, and then besought the Yúsufzais and Mandațs to grant them
lands in the Doába in the Peshawar valley. Speedily, however, they
intrigued against their benefactors and in 1519 also called in Bábar to
aid them against the Dilazáks, but their internal dissensions led him to
suspect treachery and he left them to face the Dilazáks, by whom they
were completely vanquished. Nevertheless in the great redistribution
of Khashi territory which followed the overthrow of the Ghwaría Khel
the Gigiánís received half Bajaur, Ambar, Náwagai and Chhármang,
in addition to the Doába.
Gil, one of the largest and most important of the Ját tribes. Ils main set.
tlements are in the Lahore and Ferozepur districts; but it is found all
along the Biás and Upper Sutlej, and under the hills as far west as Siálkot.
Gil its ancestor, and the father of Sher Gil,t was a Ját of Raghobansi
Rájput descent who lived in the Ferozepur district; he was a lineal
* The Polloted Plain.
+ The origin of the name Sher Gil is thus related : Pirthipat had no son and was advised
to take to wife a woman from a lower clan, so he espoused the daughter of a Bhalar Ját.
She bore him a son, but his three Rájput wives replaced him by a stone, and bad bim
abandoned in a forest. But Pirthipat, when out hunting, found him with a lion and
bro'lght him homs. As he was found in a marshy (gibi) place he was named Sher Gil!



300
The Gil Játs.
descendant of Pirthipál, Rája of Garh Mithila and a Waria Rájput,
by a Bhular Ját wife. The tribe rose to some importance under the
Sikhs, and the history of its principal family is told at pages 352 f
of Griffin's Panjab Chiefs.
Two pedigrees of Gil are given below. He had 12 sons who founded
as many muhins :-
Sobhrú, Jaj, Talocharú, Kesaria, Chhaj, Jiúna, Babawara, Wadhan,
Chheli, Mokha, Ráji and Shahi.
Pedigree I.
Pedigree II.
Rám Chandar.
Suraj (Son).
Marot,
Lanu.
Kashab.
Widya.
Buraj. Wanipal.
Kaulpal.
Hardit.
Kankar.
Kara.
Udási.
Gaj.
Dhaul.
Harban,
Raghpat.
Talocha.
Uderáp.
. Shah.
Majang.
Mal. Suratia. Achraj. Markhaul.
Jogan. Kamde. Dhaních. Goi.
Daryan.
Thambar. Lob Bain.
Nayan.
Wani Pal. Bachkar.
Dilthe.
Jobir.
Kaur Pal.
Harpal.
Manhela.
Udási.
Bang.
Kang. Ruha. Punun. Tandal.
Manhaj.
Nayan,
Chahal.
Tad
Manhaj.
Karor.
Jobir.
Wargar.
Aulakh.
Kathi.
Mathla.
Sindhu.
Ajanat.
Manhaj.
Wabhar.
Karor.
Pirthipat.
Rathi.
Gul
Ajanat.
Wanbhir.
Pirthi Pat.
Gil.
The Gils worship their eponym on the Chet Chaudas at Rajiána,
in Moga tahsil, where he has a temple. He also appears to be called
Rájá Pír and to be specially affected by the Wairsi Gils. In Jind
their jathera is Surat Rám, whose shrine is at Bajewala in Pațiála and
offerings to which are taken by Mirásis. In Ferozepur the tribe is said to
affect Sakhi Sarwar and its men prefer to be called Dípa, Sarúpa, etc.,
instead of Dip Singh, Sarúp Singh, and so on, with the title of Mſan'
prefixed. At weddings they dig earth from the pond of Sakhi Sarwar
near their home. They eschew jhatka meat, but will eat it if halát, like
Muhammadans. When some of the tribe took to eating the flesh
of animals killed in the Sikh fashion by jhatka, one lost his eyes,
another found himself in jail, and so on, so they roverted to their former
practice.



Giláni-Golera.
301
The Gil, like ihe Her and Sidhu Játs can intermarry in their
maternal grandfather's got, contrary to the usual Hindu rule. A Gil
bridegroom cuts a branch from the jand tree before setting out on his
wedding journey.
Gílání, a Sayyid clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Montgomery ;
see Jílání.
GIR, & Muhanmadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
GIRWÁNH, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
In Baháwalpur they are also called Garwánh and are found as land-
owners and cultivators in the Baháwalpur and Ahmadpur Kárdárís,
with three septs, Attú, Jálap and Karer.
GISOKAURI, a Baloch tribe, now found scattered in Dera Ismáíl, Muzaffar-
garh and Montgomery; also in Mekrán. Apparently derived from
Gishkaur, a torrent in the Boheda valley of Mekrán. The Lashári
sub-tuman has a Gishkauri sept and the Dombki a clan of that name.
In Montgomery the Gishkauri is listed as an agricultural clan.
GODÁRA, & prosperous clan of Játs, of the Shibgotra group, found in
Hissár, where it owns large areas in Sirsa and Fatehábád tahsils. They
trace their descent from Nimbuji, who founded a village near Bíkáner,
and say that as they could not agree upon one of their own clan as
chieftain they asked the Rája of Jodhpur to give them one of his
younger sons as their ruler, so he gave them Bíká in whose hopour
Bíkáner was founded. To this day, it is said, the ráj-tilak is marked
on the forehead of a new Raja of Bíkáner by a Godára Ját, and not by
the family priest.
GOHAŘ, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Gohrá, a Ját tribe found in Jind tahsíl. Its eponym is said to have been a
Túr Rájput.
Goj, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GOKHA, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Golan, a weaver, in Pesháwar. There are Gola groups or classes among
the Jolágás, Kumhárs, Náis and Súds.
GOLERA, a tribe which gives its name to the tract in Ráwalpindi so called.
It is descended from its eponym, the third son of Qutb Shah, and in
Sialkot has four branches, Golera, Kahambárah, Dengla and Mandú.
Golera.
Bindú.
Túr.
Banjúr.
Dengla.
Mandú. Bharahwin.
Samdúh.
Singi.
Kabambárah.



302
Goleria-Gorátah.
According to Cracroft the Golera are Awáns, a statement confirmed
by their claim to descend from Qutb Shah.
GOLERIA, an offshoot of the great Rajput clan, the Katoch, bearing a terri-
torial designation from Goler.
GOLIA or GAWÁLIA, a very curious tribe of Játs, only found in Rohtak
and Karnál. They declare that they were originally Brahmans, who
lost caste by inadvertently drinking liquor placed outside a distiller's
house in large vessels (gol). The local Brahmans apparently adınit the
truth of this story. They now intermarry with Játs, but not with the
Dágar or Salanki ; for while they were Brahmans the latter were their
clients, while when they first lost caste the former alone of all Ját tribes
would give them their daughters to wife, and so have been adopted as
quasi-brethren. They came from Indore to Rohtak some 30 generations
ago.
GONDAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur, Multán, and (classed as
Rájput) in Montgomery. They hold the upland known as the Gondal
Bár, running up the centre of the tract between the Jhelum and Chenáb.
They are also pumerous in the riverain on the right bank of the former
river in the Jhelum district, and a few have spread eastward as far as
the Rávi. They are said to be Chauhan Rajputs, but they are now of
Ját status and intermarry with other Ját tribes. 'Physically they are a fine
race, owing doubtless to the free and active life they lead, and the quan-
tities of animal food they consume; and if we except their inordinate
passion for appropriating their neighbours' cattle, which in their estima-
tion carries with it no mora] taint, they must be pronounced free from
vice. They say their ancestor came from Naushahra in the south to Pák-
pattan, and was there converted by Bábá Farid ; and if this be so they
probably occupied their present abodes within the last six centuries.
GONDÁL, a tribe of Muhammadan Játs in Gujrát which claims Chauhan
Rájput origin. Its eponym came from the Deccan to visit the shrine of
Báwá Faríd and Pák pattan and embraced Islám.
GoPálak, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GOPÁNG, GOPHÁNG, one of the broken BALOCH tribes of Dera Gbázi Khán.
It lies scattered along the Indus and is also found in Muzaffargarh
and on the Lower Indus and Sutlej in Bahawalpur and Multán.
GOPA Rai, a tribe of Játs, claiming Solar Rajput origin and descent
from its eponym through Millú who migrated from Amritsar to Siálkoç.
Also found in Muzaffargarh and Montgomery in which Districts they are
classed as agricultoral clans.
Gor, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Goráe, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
GORAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GORANG, a Gurkhá clan (Nipalese) found in the Simla Hill States.
GORÁTAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.



Goráya-Gosáin.
303
GOBÁYA, & Ját tribe, said to be descended from the Sarona family of
Lunar Rájputs, and to have come to Gujranwala as a nomad and pastoral
tribe from Sirsa. Another story is that they are descended from a
Sombansi Rájput called Guráya whose grandson Mal came from the
Lakki thal some 15 generations ago. A third tradition is that Rána,
their founder, came from the Jammu hills in the time of the emperors.
They are now found in Gujranwala, Siálkot and Gurdaspur. They own
31 villages in Gujranwala and are excellent cultivators, being one of
the most prosperous tribes in the District. They have the same pecu.
liar marriage customs as the Sahi Jáțs. In Sialkot they revere Pír
Mundá, round whose khángáh a bridal pair walks seven times, and offer.
ings are made to it. This is done both by Hindus and Muhammadans.
They are said to be governed by the chúndavaną rule of inheritance. In
Montgomery the Muhammadan Goráyá appears as a Ját, Rájput and
Aráín clan (all three agricultural), and in Shahpur it is also classed as
Ját (agricultural). The word goráyá is said to be used for the nilgái
(Forcax picta) in Central India. They are sometimes said to be a clan
of the Dhillon tribe, but in Sialkot claim descent from Budh who had
20 sons, including Goráya.
Gorí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
GORIA, a small Ját clan found in Nábha. It derives its name from Goran
Singh, a Rájput, who settled at Alowál in Pațiála and thus became
a Ját.
GORJIYE, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
GORKHA. See Gurkhá.
GORON, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Gorsí, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
GORWAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
GORYE, (1) an Aráín clan (agricultural); (2) a Mughal clan (agricultural):
both found in Amritsar.
Gosáín, a term even more vaguely used than "Sanniási Bairagi' and
very difficult to define in the Punjab. Roughly speaking, it denotes an
ascetic of any order, but it further connotes that he is of some standing
and influence. Strictly speaking, however, the Gosáíns form a distinct
order, which differs both from the Bairagis and the Sanniásís, though
they are often entitled Gosáíns, and often the Brahmans alone are con-
sidered privileged to be so styled. In Kángļa the Gosáíns form a
separate caste, as well as an order, and are known as Sanniásís or
Dasnámís, because they are divided into ten schools. These were
founded by the ten pupils of Shankar Achárj and the following scheme
exbibits their spiritual descent and distribution*:--
* From the dasnám of the Gosáins : “Bhaktmál", Nawal Kishor, 1927, p. 77. But
another account gives Rukhap and Dandi instead of Asram and Sáraswati. It also
states that the Rukhar is like an Achárj (Brahman) in that he receives gifts on the death
of a Gosáin. In the Brahmacharj ásram or stage the 'Gosáín' dons the janeo or
sacred thread of caste, in the second ásrum or degree he becomes a Gosáin and puts
it off again. In the third ásram he becomes a paramhans, and in the fourth an ABDHÚT.
The paramhans shayes his head and the abdhút generally lives naked. This is the
order observed in the Sanyás Dharm, but now-a-days a Gosáín merely besmears himself
with ashes and goes forth as an abdhút. The true Gosáin must not appreach a fire,
and when he dies he is buried, not cremated,



304
The Gosáins.
VISHNU
Shiv
Chelas.
Bashisht
Shakt
Parásir
Biás
Sukdov
Sons.
Gor Achárj
Gorind
Shankar Swámí)
or
Sarúp Achárj Padm Achárj Totah Achárj Pribhuí Dhar Achári
(ziárdá Mat in (Gurdhan Mat (Toyashí Mat (Sríngeri called Singrí
West)
in East)
in North)
Mat in South)
D DrTM
Tírt Ásram Ban Aranya Girí Parbhat Ságar Saraswati Bharati Purí
or
or
or
or
Tirth
Bán Aran
Parbat
Bhárthi
These correspond with the ten pâds of the Sanniásís, and the
Gosáín may be regarded as a semi-secularised offshoot of the Sanniksi
order. When the Muhammadan invasions began, says one account
of the Sanniásís, many of them fled to the hills of Kángra and Simla
where they formed colonies. In some places they intermarried with
Brabmans and took to cultivation, gradually amassing such wealth
that the hill people, including their Rájás and Ránas, were in their
debt and they controlled all the trade between the hills and the plains,
In their practice of usury they were rapacious to an incredible degree,
charging 24, 60 and even 72 per cent. a year, and making regular
tours in state after each harvest, in spring and autumn, to collect their
dues in kind. Once in debt to the Gosáíns there was no escape for
a debtor, and they preached the doctrine that the removal of a debtor's
name from their books was an ill-omen to both parties. To the power
of capital they added the influence of their own sanctity and though
the Gurkha invasions broke up their domination they continped to
exhaust the resources of the people in the Outer Saráj tract of Kullu
till quite recently. On the other hand the Gosáíns of Kángra, who
are principally found in Nádaun and Jawalamukhi, were a u enterprising
and sagacious community engaged in wholesale trade. They mono-
polised the trade in opium and speculated in charas, wool and cloth.
Their transactions extended to the Deccan and indeed over all India,
but generally speaking, they are now impoverished and their brick.
built ware-houses at Jawalamukhi are mostly in ruins. Most of the
Kángra Gosáíns are of the Giri sub-order, and affix.gir to their names.
In theory the Gosáíns are celibate, and recruit by adopting chelas
from pure castes who may be willing to dedicate their sons to them,
but in practice marriage is usual. Those who marry are styled
gharbári. Natural sons do not succeed unless adopted as chelas,



Gosal-Guda.
305
Widows are merely entitled to maintenance. Secular Gosáíns will not
plough, but they do not wear any janeo, retain the choti and yet wear
a pagri dyed with red ochre. The religious or mațdári Gosáíns form
fraternities and, though they do nnt marry, keep women. They are
divided into akháras or small colleges each under a mahant who has
supreme control of all its property, the disciples being dependent
on his bounty A mahant designates his successor, and his selection
is rarely disputed, but if he die without having named a successor
the fraternity meets together and with the aid of other Gosáíng elects
a new mahant. After his installation the late mahant's property is
distributed by him as he thinks 6t, and this distribution, or bhandara
as it is called, is rarely impugned. Like a Sanniási the Gosáín is buried,
e cenotaph or samadh, dedicated to Mahadeo, being raised over him,
as he is supposed at death to be re-united with the god. Initiation
consists simply in tha gurú's cutting off the choti ; the head is then
close shaved and the gurú mantar read.
In Sirsa the Gosáíns form a separate caste, originating in a
sub-division of the Sanniøsís which was founded by Shimbu Achárj.
Every Gosáín is given at initiation a name, which ends in gir, púri
(the two most commonly found in this tract), tirath, ásram, ásan or
nath, by his gurú. Each of these sub-orders is endogamous, 2.8.,
a gir may not marry a púrí.* The Gossíns are also said to have gots,
and to be furtber divided into the gharbár or secular and the celibato
who are either (1) mațdári (whose dwelling, mat, is inside the village
and who may engage in all worldly pursuits, but not marry), (2)
ásandári (whose house is on the outskirts of the village), or (3) abdhút,
who wander about begging, but may not beg for more than seven hours
at one place. The abdhút carry with them a nárial or cocoanut shell,
and may only take in alms cooked grain which they must soak in
water before they eat it. Nor may they halt more than three days at
any place unless it be a terath (place of pilgrimage) or during the rains.
Gosáins are generally clad in garments dyed with geru.
In the south-west of the Punjab the priests of Shámji and Lálji
who are Khatrís and found largely at Leia and Bhakkar, are called
Gosáíns. The Khatrís and Arorás of the south-west are either
disciples (sewaks) of these Gosáids or Sikhs.f Other Goséíns are
those of Baddoke,
The Gosáíds appear to bh correctly classed as a Vaishnava sect or
rather order, though in the hills they affect Mahádeo and are mahants
of temples of Shiva.
GOSAL, a small Ját clan which is found in Jind and has a Sidh, Bála, at
Badrúkhan, where offerings are made to his samadh.
GRANTHí, a reader of the Sikh Granth, an expounder thereof ; but cf. Giáni.
Guda, a tribe of Játs found in Kapúrthalá State, Sultanpur tabsil. Its
tradition avers that it migrated from Delbi in the Mughal times.
* The gurú of the púris resides at Kharak, and that of the giris at Bálak, both in
Hissár. Hissar Gazetteer, 1904, p. 81.
† Consus Report, 1891, $ 66, p. 127-8.



MAR, Cully found istmetel that name of the
306
Gugera-Gujar.
GUGERA, (1) one of the principal muhins or clans of the Sikls in Jhang. It
gave its name to the township of that name, once the head-quarters of
the present Montgomery district and still of a tahsil; (2) also a Kharral
clan (agricultural, found in Montgomery.
GÚJAR, GUJJAR, -ur, fem. -1. Dim. GUJARETÁ, fem. -1, and GUJREȚRÁ fem. •Í.. S
young Gujar. Derivatives are Gajrál or Gujrehrá, & dwelling-place of
Gujars; and Gujrát, the country or tract of the Gujars. The District
of Gujrát takes its name from the town of Gajrát, but the present town
though a modern one stands on the site of an ancient city called Udanagri,
the everlasting or fragrant township. Popular tradition assigns its
foundation to Rájá Bachan Pál, a Surajbansi Rájput who came from the
Gangetic Doáb, and attributes its restoration to Ali Khán, a Gujar,
doubth ss the historical Alak hána, Rájá of Gurjara, who was defeated
by Sangkara Varma between 883 and 901 A. D. Captain Mackenzie,
however, recorded another tradition which assigned the restoration of
Gujrát town to Rání Gujran, wife of Badr Sain, son of Rájá Risalú
of Sialkot who rebuilt it in Sambat 175 (A. D. 118). Both accounts
agree in ascribing the refounding of the modern town to the time
of Akbar. According to Stein, Shankara Varma of Kashmir, soon
after his accession in 883 A. D., undertook an expedition to the
south and south-west of Kashmír and first invaded Gujaradesa, a
tract certainly identifiable with the modern District of Gujrát, which
lies between the Chenab and Jhelum* At an earlier period, in the
latter part of the 6th century, the Raja of Thánesar, Prabákara-vardhana,
had also carried on a successful campaign against the Hun settlements
in the north-west Punjab and the clans of Gurjara't, so that it would
appear that a branch of the Gurjara race was firmly established in the
modern Gojrát before 600 A. D.I"
The modern District of Gujrát, however, comprises the Herát or Ját
pargana and the Gujrát or Gujar pargana. These parganas used to
be divided into tappas and the tappas into tops, each top being under
a chaudhri.
The modern District of Muzaffargarh also possesses a Gujrát on tho
Indus, in the riverain which runs parallel with the Dera Gházi Khan
district.
THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE GUJARS.
The present distribution of the Gujars in India is thus described by
Sir Alexander Cunningham :-
« At the present day the Gujars are found in great numbers in every
part of the North-West of India, from the Indus to the Ganges, and
from the Hazára mountains to the Peninsula of Gujarat. They are
specially numerous along the banks of thə Upper Jumna, near Jagádhri
and Buriya, and in the Saharanpur district, which during the last
century was actually called Gujarat. To the east they occupy the petty
* stein. Zur Geschichte der Cáhis von Kabul (Festgruss an Rudolf von Roth, Stuttgart,
1893). See also Stein's Rájátarangini, p. 204, Vol. I.
+ ý. Smith, Early Hist. of India, p. 283.
For the derivation of the word Gujrát see Dr. Fleet's pote in J. R. A. 8., 1906, p. 459.
uthorives it from Gujaratrá, Prakrit Gujjarattá, the modern name of Guzerát being duo
Ho Alberúni's Guz(a)rát. Gújranwala means the 'Gújars' village,' Gújrát the 'Gájars'
country,' a distinction overlooked in Baden-Powell's Indian Village Community.
& Gujrát Gazetteer, 1892-93, p. 19. Cf. the Sett. Rep, of the Gujrát District, 1861, p. 2.
The term Horát is of unknown origin, but it appears to be also called the Jat átar.



Distribution of the Gujars.
807
State of Samptar in Bundelkhand, and one of the northern Districts of
Gwalior, which is still called Gujargár. They are found only in small
bodios and much scattered throughout Eastern Rajputána and Gwalior;
but they are more numerous in the Western States, and specially
towards Gujarát, where they form a large part of the population. The
Rájás of Rewari to the south of Delhi are Gujars. In the Southern
Punjab they are thinly scattered, but their numbers increase rapidly
towards the north, where they have given their name to several
important places, such as Gujranwala in the Rechna Doáb, Gujrat in
the Chaj Doáb, and Gujar Khan in the Sindh Ságar Doáb. They are
numerous about Jhelum and Hassan Abdál,* and throughout the Hazára
district; and they are also found in considerable numbers in the Dardu
districts of Chilás, Kohli, and Pálas, to the east of the Indus, and in
the contiguous districts to the west of the river."
In the Punjab they essentially belong to the lower ranges and sub-
montane tracts; and though they have spread down the Jumna in
considerable aumbers, they are almost confined to the riverain low-
lands. In the higher mountains they are almost unknown. Gujrát is
still their stronghold, and in that District they form 131 per cent. of
the total population. There alone have they retained their dominant
position. Throughout the Salt Range, and probably under the eastern
hills also, they are the oldest inhabitants among the tribes now settlod
there; but in the west the Gakkhařs, Janjúas, and Patháns, and in the
east the Rájputs have always been too strong for them, and long ago
deprived them of political importance. In the Peshawar district
almost any herdsman is called a Gujar, and it may be that some of
those who are thus returned are not true Gujars by race. But
throughout the hill country of Jammu, Chibhál, and Hazára, and away
in the territory lying to the north of Peshawar as far as the Swát
river, true Gujar herdsmen are found in great numbers, all possessing
a common speech, which is a Hindi dialect quite distinct from the
Panjabi or Pashto current in those parts. Here they are a purely
pastoral and almost nomad race, taking their herds up into the higher
ranges in summer and descending with them into the valleys during
the cold weather; and it may be said that the Gujar is a cultivator
only in the plains. Even there he is a bad cultivator, and more given
to keeping cattle than to following the plough. In Chitral also Gujars
are found in the Shishi Kuh valley, while the Bashgals (the Káfirs of
the Bashgal valley are so styled by Chitralis) are described as curiously
like the Gujars in the Punjab.t
It is impossible without further investigation to fix the date of the
Gujar colonization of the lower districts. They are almost exclusively
Musalmán except in the Jumna Districts and Hoshiarpur, and they
müst therefore have entered those Districts before the conversion of the
great mass of the caste. The Jullundur Gujars date their conversion
from the time of Aurangzeb, a very probable date. The Ferozepur
Gajars say that they came from Dáranagar in the south of India, that
they moved thence to Ránia in Sirsa, and thence again to Ferozepur
viâ Kasúr. The Musalmán Gujars of all the eastern half of the Pro.
mad racing with that thibivator hitrala Kafirsusly
* Hassan was himself a Gújar.
† But Bashgali is essentially an Iranian dialost. See Sten Konow's Classification of
Bashgali, in J. R. A. 8., 1911, P. I.



308
Gujar characteristics.
vince still retain more of their Hindu customs than do the majority of
their converted neighbours, their women, for instance, wearing petti-
coats instead of drawers, just as they do io Jullundur alao), and red
instead of blue. In Jallundur the Gujar shoe is usually of a peculiar
make, the upper leather covering little of the foot. It is noticeable that
Gujrát is to the Gujars what Bhatner and Bhattiána are to the Bhatti,
a place to which there is a traditional tendency to refer their origin.
The Gujar is a fine stalwart fellow, of precisely the same physical
type as the Ját ;* and the theory of aboriginal descent which has some-
times been propouoded, is to my mind conclusively negatived by his
cast of countenance. He is of the same social standing as the Ját, or
perhaps slightly inferior ; but the two eat and drink in common without
any scruple, and the proverb says: “The Ját, Gujar, Abír, and Gola
are all four hail fellows well met." But he is far inferior in both
pers)nal character and repute to the Ját. He is lazy to a degree, and
a wretched cultivator; his women, though not secluded, will not do
field work save of the lightest kind; while his fondness for cattle
extends to those of other people. The difference between a Gujar and
a Rájput cattle-thief was once explained to me thus by a Ját: “The
Rájput will steal your buffalo. But he will not send his father to
say he knows where it is and will get it back for Rs. 20, and then
keep the Rs. 20 and the buffalo too. The Gojar will.” The Gujars
have been turbulent throughout the history of the Punjab, they were
a constant thorn in the side of the Delhi emperors, and are still ever
ready to take advantage of any loosening of the bonds of discipline to
attack and plunder their neighbours. Their character as expressed in
the proverbial wisdom of the countryside is not a high one: “A
desert is better than a Gnjar : wherever you see a Gujar, hit him."
Again: " The dog and the cat two, the langar and the Gojar two;
il it were not for these four, one might sleep with one's door open":
so “ The doy, the monkey, and the Gujar change their minds at every
step;” and “When all other castes are dead make friends with a
Gujar.” As Mr. Maconachie remarks: “ Though the Gujar possesses
two qualifications of a highlander, a hilly home and a constant desire
for other people's cattle, he never seems to have had the love of
fighting and the character for manly independence which distinguishes
this class elsewhere. On the contrary he is generally a mean, sneak-
ing, cowardly fellow; and I do not know that he improves much with
the march of civilization, though of course there are exceptions; men
who have given up the traditions of the tribe so far as to recognize
the advantage of being honest-generally.”
Such is the Gujar of the Jurya Districts.t But further west his
character would seem to be higher. Major Wace describes the Gujars
* This description would appear to require some qualification. The Gujar of Kashmir
is described as tall and gaunt, his forehead and his chin are narrow, his nose fine and
slightly curved. The Gujar of the United Provinces is above the medium height, well made
and active, his face long and oval, and his features fine rather than coarse. Crooke
describes him as a fairly typical Indo-Aryan. J. R, A. S., 1907, p. 984 The Punjab
Gujar might be well described in the above terms. As compared with the Ját he has
better features, but is not of such a good type.
† Sir J Wilson. however, wrote: "The Gujar villages.in Gurgaon have on the whole stood
the late bad times better than those of almost other caste-better than the Játs, and almost
as well as the Ahírs. Our Gurgáon Gujars are very little given to thieving, and I have
rather a high opinion of them."



The Gugars in Kángra.
309
of Hazára as “a simple all-enduring race, thrifty and industrious, with
no ambition but to be left alone in peace with their cattle and fields ";
and " many of them are fine men in every way." Mr. Thomson says
that the Gujars of Jhelum are the best farmers in the District (perhaps
not excessive praise in a District held by Gakkhars, Awáns, and
Rájputs), though the Maliár or Aráíņ is a better market gardener;
and that they are quiet and industrious, more likeable than (Salt Range)
Játs, but with few attractive qualities, Mr. Steedman gives a similar
account of the Gujars of Rawalpindi, calling them "excellent culti-
vators." So the Gujars of Hoshiarpur are said to be “a quiet and
well-behated set." In Jullundur Sir Richard Temple described them
as “here as elsewhere of pastoral habits, but more industrious and less
predatory than usual”; and Mr. Barkley writes: "At present, after
30 years of British rule, they are probably as little given to crime as
any other large class in the agricultural population. It is still
generally true that they occupy themselves more with grazing than
with agriculture; but this is by no means invariably the case." But
in Ferozepur again Mr. Brandreth describes them as “ unwilling
cultivators, and greatly addicted to thieving," and gives instances of
their criminal propensities. Thus it would appear that the further the
Gujar 'moves from his native hills, the more he deteriorates and the
more unpleasant he makes himself to his neighbours. The following
description of the Gujars of Kangſa by Mr. Barnes is both graphic and
interesting :
“The Gujars of the bills are quite unlike the caste of the same desig.
nation in the plains. There they are known as an idle, worthless and
thieving race, rejoicing in waste, and enemies to coltivation and im-
provement; but above and below they are both addicted to pastoral
habits. In the hills the Gujarş are exclusively a pastoral tribe,--they
cultivate scarcely at all. The Caddis keep flocks of sheep and goats,
and the Gujar's wealth consists of buffaloes. These people live in the
skirts of the forests, and maintain their existence exclusively by the
sale of the milk, ghi, and other proäuce of their herds. The men
graze the cattle, and frequently lie out for weeke in the woods tending
their herds. The women repair to the markets every morning with
baskets on their heads, with little earthen pots filled with milk, butter-
milk and ghi, each of these pots containing the proportion required
for a day's meal. During the hot weather the Gujars usually drive
their herds to the upper range, where the buffaloes rejoice in the rich
grass which the rains bring forth, and at the same time attain condition
from the temperate climate and the immunity from venomous flies
which torment their existence in the plains. The Gujars are a fine,
manly race, with peculiar and handsome features. They are mild and
inoffensive in inanner, and in these hills are not distinguished by the
had pre-eminence which attaches to their race in the plains. They are
never known to thieve. Their women are supposed to be not very
scrupulous. Their habits of frequenting public markets and carrying
about their stock for sale nbaccompanied by their husbands undoubtedly
expose them to great temptations; and I am afraid the imputations
against their character are too well founded. They are tall, well-grown
women, aod may be seen every morning entering the bazars of the hill
towns, returning home about the afternoon with their baskets emptied
tions and dedi." They are mars of the bied



310
Gujar origins.
of their treasures. Tho Gujars are found all over the District. They
abound particularly about Jwalamukbi, Tira, and Nadaun. There
are some Hindu Gujars, especially towards Mandi; but they are a small
sect compared to the Musalmans."
“ It has been suggested,” continued Sir Denzil Ibbetson, “and is I
believe held by many, that Játs and Gujars, and perhaps Ahírs also, are
all of one ethuic stock; and this because there is a close communion
between them. It may be that they are the same in their far-distant
origin. But I think that they must have either entered India at differ-
ent times or settled in separate parts, and my reason for thinking 80 is
precisely because they eat and smoke together. In the case of Ját and
Rájput the reason for differentiation is obvious, the latter being of
higher rank than the former. But the social standing of Játs, Gujars,
and Ahírs being practically identical, I do not see why they should
ever have separated if they were once the same. It is however
possible that the Játs were the camel graziers and perhaps husband-
men, the Gujars the cowherds of the hills, and the Ahírs the cowherds
of the plains. If this be so, they afford a classification by occupation
of the yeoman class, which fills up the gap between and is absolutely
continuous with the similar classication of the castes above them as
Brahmans, Banias, and Rájputs, and of the castes below them as Tarkbáns,
Chamárs, and so forth. But we must know more of the early distribu-
tion of the tribes before we can have any opinion on the subject. I have
noticed in the early historians a connection between the migrations and
location of Gujars and Rájputs wbich has struck me as being more than
accidental; but the subject needs an immense deal of work upon it
before it can be said to be even ready for drawing conclusions.*
THE ORIGIN OF THE GOJARS.
A full history of the ancient Gurjaras and of the great Gurjara
empire, the existence of which the late Mr. A. M. T. Jackson claimed to
bavo established,t would be beyond the scope of this article, but the
reader's attention may be directed to certain incidents in their history
in the Punjab. According to Dr. Rudolf Hoernle the Tomaras (the
modern Tunwar Rajputs) were a clan of the Gurjaras, and indeed their
imperial or ruling clan. The Pehowa (Pehoa in the Karnal district)
inscription records of a Tomara family that it was descended from a
rájá, Jáula, whose name recalls that of the Shahi Javúvla or Jahula
and of the mahárája, Toramáda Sháhi Jaúvla of the Kura inscription.
Dr. Hoernle thinks it probable that the Kachwáhás and Parihars, like
the Tomaras, were all clans or divisions of a Jávula tribe, claiming
descent from Toramána, king of the White Huns or Ephthalites. I
Mr. Bhandarkar has shown that the Solankis (Chaulakyas), Parihars
ent Gurjaras
krticle, bent story
* Mr. Wilson notes that the Gujars and the Bargújar tribe of Rajputs are often found
together, and suggests that the latter may be to the Gújars what the Khánzádahs are to
the Meos and what most Rájputs are to the Játs.
+ See his note in J. R. A. 8. 1905, pp. 163-4, where he identifies the Gurjaras with the
Gaudas (Ganja, now Brahmans) and points out that according to Alborúni (Bachau's
Frans, i., p. 310) Guda= Táneshar. The Gaaf Brahmans were and indood are parohits of
the Hindu Gujars and still winister to some who are converts to Islám,
† J. R. A. 8., 1905, pp. 1.4. It may furtber be noted that the Baf. or Bad.Gujar
Rajputs are probably of Gujar descent.



Krishna and the Gujars.
311
nyaet interrelis Gwalior hose forei furned sort and in followed by
(Pratíháras), Parmars (Paramáras) and Chauháns (Cháhumanas or
Cháhuvánas), the four so-called Agnikula clans of Rájputs, were originally
divisions of the Gurjaras, and to these Dr. Hoernle would thus add the
Tomaras and Kachhwahas. The exact ethnic relation of the Gúrjaras
to the Huns is still very obscure, but as a working hypothesis Dr.
Hoernle thinks that in the earlier part of the 6th century A. D. a great
invasion of Central Asiatic peoples, Huns, Gúrjaras and others, whose
exact interrelation we do not know, took place. The first onset carried
them as far as Gwalior, but it was checked by the emperor of Kavauj, and
the main portion of these foreign hordes settled in Rajputána and the
Punjab, while the Chaulakyas turned south. In the north the invaders
fused with the natives of the country and in the middle of the 7th
century the Parihars emerged, an upgrowth followed by that the
Parmars, Chauhans and imperial Gúrjaras about 750 A. D. About 840
the Gúrjara empire, with its capital at Kanauj, embraced nearly the
whole of northern India, under Bhoja I, bat after his death it declined. *
Another problem of great interest in the history of Indian religions
is the connection of the Gurjaras with the cult of the child Krishna of
Mathurá, es contrasted with that of the ancient Krishņa of Dwáraká.t
This cult was, almost beyond question, introduced into India by
nomads from the north, very probably by the Gúrjaras. No doubt the
modern Gujars, even those who have retained their Hindu creeds, have
lost all recollection of any special devotion to the cult of Krishna, and
he is now prominent in the traditions of the Auírs, but certain groups
of the Ahírs appear to be of Gúrjara origin. Among them we find the
Nandbansi whose name reminds us of Nand Mihr, a legendary progeni.
tor of the Gujars, and a Solanki (Chaulakya) got appears among the
Jádúbansi. If we may assume that these two great races, the Gujar
and Ahír, once pastoral, and still largely so, are really identical, the
theory that the cult of the child Kệishna was introduced into India by
the Gujars in general or more particularly by the Nandbansi and
Guálbansi branches of the Ahírs becomes greatly strengthened. Like
the Huns, the Gúrjaras were originally sun-worshippers, but they have
lost all traces of any special devotion to the cult of the Sun.god, and
may have acquired some tincture of Christianity either from their
neighbours in Central Asia or from their connection with Christians
among the Hups.
Various origins are claimed by different Gujar clans. Thus in
Gujrát the Chauhan claim descent from Rai Pithora of Delhi,
The Chhokar in Karnál say they are Chandarbansi and an offshoot of
the Jádu Rajputs of Muzaffarnagar in the United Provinces. The
Bhod wál, Kalsian and Rawal all claim to be Chandarbansi, the
Kalsián being Chauhans and the Rawáis Khokhar Rajputs by origin ;
but the Chhamán say they are Surajbansi and Tunwars.
In Gurdaspur the Bhadána, Chhála, Kasána, Múníng and Tur gots
claim Rájput descent and the Banths and Bujars Ját extraction, while
* Ibid. pp. 31-32, and p. 4.
+ See Krishna, Christianity und the Gujars, by Mr. J. Kennedy in J R. A.S., 1907, p. 875.
| Ibid. p. 989.
Š From the Múnín Gajars some of the Bharais and Bázigars are said to have branch.
ed off.



312
The Gujar sections.
the Chapras say they are Khatrís by origin, and the Modis, Pathans.
The Chhála got claims descent from Rájá Som Bans, Rájá of Gahç
Gajni in the Deccan, and its ancestor embraced Islám at Ráhon in
Jullundur, married a Gang Kasána girl and so became a Gujar. The
Kasána declares itself descended from Rájá. Kans, the Múnín from Rájá
Indar Rai, and the Pandána from Rájá Panda Rái.
The Paswal ascribe their foundation to Wajíh Kalbi, a companion of
the Prophet, who accompanied Ahutas, ruler of Yemen, when he
conquered Kashmír. The Paswal originally settled in Sialkot but have
spread into Gardáspur.
The Hindu Ráwat Mandan got is found in the Bawal nizámat of
Nábha. It traces its descent to one Ráwat who fell in love with a
damsel, Gorsi, whom he only carried off after a great struggle. His
mésalliance cost him his status as a Rájput and he became a Gujar.
The got derives its name from him and from the number of heads
(mandan) wbicb fell in the struggle for Gorsi. This got is numerous
in Jaipur, where it keeps its women in parda and forbids widow
remarriage, but this is allowed in Nábha. Formerly the Ráwat
Mandan did not roof their houses or put planks to their doorways,
though they now do so. A child's first tonsure should be performed at
the shrine of Swami Pun Dás in Rewári tabsíl.
The Chokar of Nábha, who appear to be distinct from the Chhokar,
are Hindus and trace their descent from Sankat, a Chauhan Rajput of
Sámbhar in Jaipur, who was a great robber. Once on the road he
forcibly espoused a beautiful girl whose kinsmen came to her aid, but
Sankat sought help from Ban Deo and he and his comrades took the
shapes of birds, and escaped. A barber too rang a wedding-bell in
front of their pursuers, and they resolved to turn back. So the got of
Sankat was called Chokar, one who misses,' and it still affects Ban
Deo, holding the first tonsure of its children at his shrine in Jaipur,
never burning cotton sticks for fuel and only using cotton after first
offering it to Ban Deo.
In Nábha the Bhargar, Chaprána, Doi, Kasána, Kharána and
Sardhána Gujars all vaguely claim Rájput origin, but unlike other
Hindu Gujars they only avoid three gots in marriage, permitting it in
the mother's father's got. They specially affect Devi and do not give
the beestings of a cow or buffalo to any one till the Amáwas, when they
cook rice in the milk, place it on a spot plastered with cow-dung and
then give it to their children. The Bhargar, like the Ráwat Mandan,
use no doors or roofs of timber, and ascribe this tabu to the fact that
one of their women became a sati and a house raised in her honour
was left incomplete.*
The Melu Gujars in Nábha are converts from Hinduism, but still
avoid four gols in marriage. They do not build two hearths close
together, or wear blue cloth. Their women wear gowns. This got
never sell milk, lest the animal fall ill, but they may sell ghi.
The elements of the Gujars are not easy to describe. Local tradi-
tions, as has already been shown, vary as to the origins of many clans,
wa
* Or unroofed ? Apparently a hypæthral shrine is meant.



The Gujar elements.
313
but the following addenda may be notedlas to the clans descended
from the various Rájput races :-Chauhan origin is claimed by the
Bhalesar, ' sons of Bhallu,' Baharwal, Jhandar, Kalsián (in Karnál).
Paowar descent is claimed by the Bahlot, Chháli, Phambhrá, sods of
Phamar' and Paur* : Jádu (Chandarbansi) descent by the Chhokar (in
Karnál), Janjúa origin by the Barráh, Khokhar (Chandarbansi) by the
Rawál (in Karnal), Manhás by the Dhinda, Sombansi by the Dhakkar,
Surajbansi by the Saramdrá, and Tur by the Chhamán (in Karnál).
Folk-ctymology and legendary lore have been busily engaged in
finding explanations of various clan names among the Gujars. Thus of
the Barras, (a word meaning "holy') it is said that their ancestor
Fatihulla used to bring water from the river at Multán barefoot, for his
spiritual guide's ablutions. One day the Pír saw that his disciple's foot
had been pierced with thorns, so he gave him his shoes, but Fatihulla
made them into a cap, as worthy to be so worn, and again his feet were
pierced with thorns. The Pír seeing this blessed him and called him
Barra.t
The Bharyár claim descent from Rájá Karn. The children of his
descendant Raja Dhal always used to die and his physicians advised
him to feed his next child on the milk of a she-wolf Dhairya), whence
the name Bharyar. Buta embraced Islám in Bábar's time and settled
in Shahpur.
Of the Gajgahi section it is said that Wali, their ancestor, was a
Khatána who wore a gajgah or horse's silver ornament, so his descendants
are now called Gajgahi.
Of the Khatánas' origin one story is that one day Mor and Mohang,
sons of Rájá Bhans, came back from hunting and ate on a khát or bed.
For this breach of social etiquette the Brahmans outcasted them, saying
they had become Muhammadans, so they adopted Islám and were
nicknamed Khatápa. Another legend makes the Khatánas descendants
of Rájá Jaspál and the Pandavas. Jaspál bad extended his dominions
from Thánesur to Jhelum and, when Sultan Mahmúd Sabuktagín
invaded Hindustán, Jaspál met him at Attock, but was defeated and
slain. His son, Anandpál, ruled for two years at Lahore and then fled
to Hindustán, leaving two sons, Khatána and Jaideo or Jagdeo, of whom
the former ruled at Lahore and turned Muhammadan. Other Gujar
clans also claim descent from Adandpál, and Sultán Mahmúd assigned
the Khatánas jágírs in Gujrát where they founded Shahpur, now a
deserted mound near Chak Ďíná.
The Khatápas are not only a leading Gujar clan but have many off.
shoots in the minor sections, such as the Gajgahis, Topas, Amrápas,
Awanas, Bhunde, Bukkans, Thilas, and the Jangal, Debar, Doi, and
Lohaar clans.
Hindu Kbatanas are also found in the Bawal nizámat of Nábha and
there claim Tur Rájput origin, deriving their name from Kbatu Nagar,
a village in Jaipur. As followers of Báwá Mohan Dás Bhadawaswala
to Hin His son, tan, Jaspal mand, whe
* One is tompted to connect his name with Porus.
† No such word is traceable in the Panjábi Dicty. The term recalls the Bargujar
Rajputs.



314
Gujar organization.
they abstain from flesh and wine. At weddings the Ját ceremonies
are observed and on the departure of the bridegroom's party his father
is beaten by the women of the bride's family.
The Topas are really Khatánas and when the Játs and Gujars were
competing for the honour of giving the biggest contribution to Akbar's
rebuilding of Gujrát town one Adam, a Khatána, paid a lakh and a
quarter of rupees into the imperial treasury, measuring the money in a
topa, whence his descendants are so named.
In Hazára the Terus say they are really Rajputs and descended
from a rájá who was so generous that when odce a faqir to test him
demanded his head he stooped so that the fagir might cut it off,
which he did. Having thus proved his generosity the faqir replaced
his head on his shoulders and prayed for his life to be restored to him.
The clan name is derived from trer, & scar.
In Delhi certain Gujar clans claim descent from eponyms. Such are
Budhána, descendants of Bhopál ; Amlaota, from Ambapál, Bhotla, from
Bharup ; Balián, from Baniapál ; Dhaidha, from Diptipàl ; Chinori, from
Chhainpál; Nangri, from Nagh pál, and Tanúr, from Toppál. As to the
Adhána, tradition says that Rajá Rám Chand of the solar race had two
sons, Lu and Kush. The latter was the progenitor of the Kachhwái
Rájputs; while Lu's son Ganwat had a son named Rájá who made a karao
marriage and was nicknamed Gujar. He had two sons Adbe and Swahi.
The latter died sonless, but Adhe founded the Adhána clav.
Organization. It is generally asserted that the real (asli) or original
Gujars are the 2} sections, Gorsi, Kasápa and the half tribe Burgat,
80-called as descended from a slave mother.* Next to these rank
the Khatánas who for a long period held sway in the Gujrat, in which
tract, however, the 21 sections were the original settlers, the other
sections having become afiliated to them in conrse of time, though
not necessarily Gujars by origin. As an instance of this process of
accretion the Gujars point to the Barras, of Hasilanwalá village in
Gujrát, whose forebear Fati-ulla, a Janjuá by birth, was deputed by
one of the saints of Multán to colonise that tract. All Gújars give
daughters to the Barras, but never receive them in retorn, and the
Barras all rank as Miánas, except those of certain families which have
forfeited their sanctity, and are designated Pír.†
In Hazára the 2} 'real' sections do not appear to be recognised, but
it is generally conceded that the Kathária, Hakla and Sarju sections
are of Rajput origin, though this origin is also claimed by several
others. Tradition avers that the Kathárias once ruled a large part of
were
10e latter was the progenitor of
* In Delhi the asli sections are said to be 34 :-Chochi, Nikádi, Gorsi, and Kasána
(the half). And in Karnál the 21 sections are said to be the Gorsi, Checbi and
K-81 a (the half), But the Chechi are anid, iu Gajrát, to be by origin Rbatánas, 80
that the accounts generally agror in representing the Gorsi, Basána and Khatána as the
3 or ginel Gujar olans several stories are told to explain their pre-ominence.
Thus in Ludhiana it is said that Jagpál, Gorsi, and Abaya, Khatá oa, successfully
rexisted Rájá Jag's father, Oda Dín, in a mock campaign for 3 years, while Nandu
Lál, Bargat, gave in after a few months-hence his clon was called the half.
+ In the 'Theluin Gazetteer the Bharras (sic) are said to be descendants of Shaikh
Natha, of the Manikhiála family, who fled from his home aftor killing a kinsman, and
died in the odour of sanctity.



Gujar clubs.
315
the Punch valley, whence the Dogras expelled them, though their chiefs
still hold large jágirs in that fief of Kashmír. Naturally the Kathárias
only take wives from Gujars of Rájput descent and only give brides
to men of their own section.*
The Gujars are often said to have 84 clans or sections and in
Ludhiana their Mirásis address them as 'Chaurási got dá diwa,' i. e.,
"Light of the 84 clans'; but other accounts assign them 101, 170 or
even 388 sections.
Of these numerous clans none have any definite superiority over the
rest, though a few have a vague local standing above their neighbours.
Such are the Khobar, Rawál, Wápe and Dhalákt in Karnál--because
they abstain from flesh and liquor, whereas the Chhokar, Kalsán,
Datyar, Dhosi and Ráthi sections do not. Of regular classes there is
hardly a trace, excepting the Miánas who form in Gujrát a semi-sacred
class. They are descendants of men who have acquired a dame for
learning or sanctity and so their descendants cannot give wives to
Gujars of less exalted rank. Indeed the leading Khatána family of
Dinga used to consider it derogatory to give daughters to any Gujar
at all and sought bridegrooms in more exalted families, or failing them
let their girls remain unwed. In Gujrát the Gujars also possess a
curious social organisation, being possessed of 84 darrs or lodges. S
Originally the number was only 54-distributed over the 7 tappas into
which the tract was divided in Akbar's time, but 20 have been added
from various families, and 5 assigned to the Gujars of Kála in Jhelum.
To become a darr-válá or member requires money, influence and popu-
larity. A candidate must-first, at his son's wedding, obtain the consent
of the existing darr-wálás, which is not easily done, as there must be no
black-balls, and he inust be on good terms with the leading men.
Having been thus elected he must pay so much per darr to the mirásis.
At pregent the rate is Rs. 11 per darr so he has to pay 84 x 11=Rs. 924,
or nearly 60 guineas as entrance-fee. His descendants remain darra
wálás, but his agnates do not acquire the privilege. At a son's wed-
ding in the family a darr-walá has to pay a fee of not less than 4 annas
to each darr for its mirási. The darr-wálás do pot as a rule give
daughters in marriage to those who do not possess equal social stand-
ing. The real origin of this system does not appear to be known, but it
has some resemblances to the Rájput chhat and makán, and perhaps
more to the lodges of the Bárá Sádát.
The social observances of the Gujars are ordinarily those of the other
Hindus or Muhammadans, as the case may be, among whom they live,
but one or two special customs are to be noted.
In Delhi a child is betrothed in infancy by the barber and Brahman
jointly, but he is not married till the age of 10 or 12. Prior to the
wedding one or the other on the bride's part go to the boy's house with
the lagan to discuss the arrangements for the wedding. Half the lik
* P. N. Q. II, § 280.
+ The Dbaláks of Keoțak in tahsil Kaithal regard themselves as exalted in rank above
the other (Xojars in Karnál and used to give danghters to the Xboter and Chhokar
Gajars east of the Jumna. Naturally this led to iemale infanticide iu Keoſak.
I In Ludhiana a few families also bear the title of Mián.
Lit, a door or threshold,



316
nudda ji runoinal bháji is entitled gots the Mirási of the and on
Gujar observances.
or dues are paid to both these functionarieg at betrothal and the other
half at the lagan, whereas Játs pay the whole at betrothal.
A day or two before the wedding madha worship is held, the beam
of a plough being pitched before the house door with a little straw tied
to its top. A large earthen jar with a smaller one full of water on top
of it is also placed beside the beam, a red thread (kaláma) being
fastened round the uppermost pot. Clearly this is a fertility charm,
and the usage does not imply that the Gujars are devoted to agricul-
ture.
In Hoshiárpar the Gujars have a curious custom at weddings,
Money, called mudda ji rupaiya or mudda at one rupee per soal,' is
given by well-to-do Gujars on such an occasion to every Mirási present,
regardless of age or sex, and a pregnant Mirásan gets two rupees, one
for each life. When a Gujar at a son's wedding gives this money to the
Mirásis of certain specified Gujar gots it is called bháji, and on the
wedding of any boy of those specified gots the Mirási of the Gujar who
gave the original bháji is entitled to a rupee. A Gojar who gives
mudda ji rupaiya is held in high esteein socially and the Mirásis style
him gharbhán ká dátá or one who is generous even to the child in the
womb.
The Gujars of Nakodar tahsil in Jullandur have the following custom
(called pindwalna) at marriages, a survival of marriage by capture.
The young men of the bridegroom's party gallop round the village,
SO as to encircle it; those of the bride's party endeavour to prevent
this. If any one of the former succeeds in completing the circle, he is
given a present by the bride's parents. Another custom is, for the
girls of the bride or bridegroom's family to try and prevent one of
their brothers-in-law from lighting the fire on which food for the
marriage feast is to be cooked. If he succeeds, be is rewarded by a
present of some article of dress. This custom is called jhalka-bhathi.*
In Gurdaspur the Muhammadan Gujars date their conversion from
Hinduism to the time of Aurungzeb. They still observe Hindu rites,
and on the birth of a son the women make an idol of cow-dupg
(govardhan), which is worshipped. The birth of a son is an expensive
event, as besides the Qázi and Mirási who are fee'd, the child's sister
and paternal aunt get clothes and a she-buffalo or money, and the Gaur
Brahman still visits some families as a parohit to bless the child's father
by placing dab grass on his head. At a wedding too he observes this
rite, but the chauka is made by a Mirási. Herein the boy is seated on a
basket before he dons his wedding garments and sets out for the bride's
house. No Gujar is allowed to marry in his own got, but the Bhatia
have given up this restriction, and generally Hindu customs are dying
out among the Muhammadan sections.
In Gujrat the customs of the Muhammadap Gujars are in general
similar to those of the Muhammadan Játs, but after a birth on the
dhawan day, when the mother bathes and leaves the place of her
confinement, a Brahman comes and makes a square (chauka), on which
a díwá made of atá (Bour) is lighted. Big rotis too are cooked, each a
topa in weight, and given to the menials. The Brahman also gets a
* But this custom is not confined to the Gujars.
It exists among the Mouns also.



Gujar cults.
817
topa of átá. In respectable families halwá is cooked as well, but it is
eaten only by persons of the same "bone," 1. e., of the same got.
Married daughters cannot eat this halwa because they have left the
got, or section. If a son's wife is away at her parents' house her share
is sent her, but none of her parents' family can eat it.
Milni is not observed at a marriage by the Gujrát Gujars, but they
observe the dawa, or 'imitation instead. Before the wedding pro-
cession leaves the bridegroom's house, the Mirási of the bride's family
goes to see what the numbers of the procession will be and so on. He
gets a present and returns, after which the wedding procession starts
for the bride's house. The Gujars also have a darr or custom of pay-
ment to the Mirásis of particular families, but it is done only by those
families, not by all Gujars, wbereas the Játs have their rathachári
which may be done by any one who chooses. The darr has already
been described. Some three or four weeks before the wedding the gala
ceremony is also observed. Gala means a handful of grain which is
put into the chaki (mill). The gala marks the commencement of the
wedding and is celebrated, after the women of the birádri have
assembled, by grinding five paropis of grain and putting the atá into
a pitcher round which mauli thread has been tied. Amongst Hindus
this mauli is first tied not only to the pitcher but to the chaki, pestle
and mortar, chhaj, etc., as well, and then the átá and other articles
required for the wedding are got together.
As a caste the Hindu Gujars appear to have no special cults, though
in Gurgaon they fervently celebrate the Gordhan festival, but it is a
Hindu, not a special Gujar, fête. In Hissár Bhairon or Khetrpál, as a
village deity, is their chief object of worship. The tradition is tbat
he was born of a virgin. His chief shrine is at Ahror (near Rewari in
Gurgaon) where many of the Hissár Gujars attend a great festival
held in his honour in February.
The Muhammadan Gujars of Hazára have a curious legend which
recalls those of Drís, the Prophet, and of Hazrat Ghaus of the Chibltan
mountain near Quetta.* Their anoestor Nand Mihr, they relate, used
to serve the Prophet and once gave him a draught of water while at
prayer. The Prophet promised to fulfil his apery wish and Nand Mihr
asked that his wife might bear him children, 80 the Prophet gave him
a charm (tawiz) for her to eat, but she did not eat it. This occurred
thirty-nine times, and when the Prophet gave Nand the fortieth charm
he made his wife eat them all at once. In due course she bore him
forty children, but finding that he could not support them all Nand Mihr
turned thirty-nine of them adrift. They prospered and built a house
into which they would not admit their unnatural father, so he. on the
Prophet's advice, surrendered to them his remaining son also.
Descendants of these forty sons are said to be found in other parts of
the Punjab and Kashmir but not in Hazára itself, save as immigrants.
By occupation the Gujars are essentially a pastoral race, so much so
that in the Gojra (? Gujrót) something like a regular siá pá is observed
on the death of a buffalo, the women mourning for it almost as if for a
* See Dames' Popular Poetry of the Baloches, p. 169, and Masson's Travels, London,
1844, II, p. 85.



318
Gújaráti or Biás.
human being. A similar custom is noted in Attock, in which District
the women may often be seen with veiled faces weeping over the death
of a milch buffalo.
In Hoshiarpur Gujar women are in great request as wet-nurses and
dwellers in towns frequently put out children to nurse with them for a
year or more in order that they may grow up strong. Some Gujars
will not allow their women to go into the towos with milk, and regard
themselves as superior to those who allow this practice, refusing them
their daughters in marriage. The freedom of Gujar women in this
respect has given rise to a general idea that they are immoral.
In dress the Gujars are not distinguished by any marked peculiari-
ties. In Gurgaon it is said that the Gujri dresses like a Kanjri, which
reminds one of the proverb :
Zamin ba yak súl banjar shawad,
Gujar he yak nukta Kanjar shawad,
“In one year land becomes waste,
By one dot 'Gujar' becomes 'Kanjar' '*
and probably is just as near the truth. In Karnál the women weave
chausi, both fine (dhotar) and coarse (girhá), of cotton, and it is usually
dyed blue or red, and then printed. In Nábha they are said not to
wear gold ornaments.
The Gujars in Baháwalpur have a hereditary representative (pagband)
who presides at weddings and funerals, but he exercises no powers and
receives no fees.
The dialect of the Gujars is Gújari or Gojari. It has strong
affinities with the language of Jaipur and is akin to Rájastháni. Gújari
is spoken by the Himalayan Gujars, including those of the Siwálik in
Hoshiarpur, but elsewhere the Gujars generally speak the dialects of
the people amongst whom they dwell, t.
GÚJARÁTI, or Biás, are described by Sir Denzil Ibbetson as • Brahmans who
came from Gujarat in Sindh, are in some respects the highest class of
all Brabmans; they are always fed first; and they bless a Gaur when
they meet him, while they will not eat ordinary bread from his hands.
They are fed on the 12th day after death, and the Gaurs will not eat
on the 13th day if this has not been done. But they take inauspicious
offerings. To them appertain'especially the Ráhu offerings made at
an eclipse. They will not take oil, sesame, goats, or green or dirty
clothes; but will take old clothes if washed, buffaloes, and satnája.
They also take a special offering to Ráhu made by a sick person, who
puts gold in ghi, looks at his face in it, and gives it to a Gújaráti, or
who weighs bimself against satnája and makes an offering of the grain.
A buffalo which has been possessed by a devil to that degree that he
has got on to the top of a house (no difficult feat in a village), or a
foal dropped in the month of Sáwen, or a buffalo calf in Mágh, are
given to the Gujarati as being unlucky. No Gaur would take them.
At every harvest the Gujarati ta kes a small allowance (seori) of grain
from the threshing floor, just as does the Gaur.” The divisions of the
Gújaráti are described on pp. 140-1 supra.
* Hoshiarpur S. R., 1885, p. 54,
+ Census Report, India, 1903, p. 335.



thanent, proclaiming and he discarded one Hirá Dás, aloian
Gujjrál-Gulábdási.
319
GUJJRÁL, a Muhammadan Ját tribe found in Gujrát, and descended from a
boy who was suckled by a Gujar foster-inother. It settled in Gujrát in
the time of Aurangzeb.
GULÁBDÁsí(A), a Sikh sect, or rather order, founded by one Guláb Dás,
an Udásí of Chatthá or Chattiánwálá near Kasúr. Its doctrines
may be described as Epicurean in tendency, though the accounts
given of them vary as to the precise tenets of the sect. One story is that
they disbelieve in the existence of God, and only revere living priests
of their own persuasion. Guláb Dás, though originally an Udásí, is
said to have fallen under the influence of one Hirá Dás, a sádh of Kasúr,
and about 70 years ago he discarded a faqir's nudity for ordinary
raiment, proclaiming that he had had a vision which convinced him
thai he had no religious superior, that pilgrimages were waste of time
and temples not possessed of any sanctity. Mr. Maclagan says that
the real founder of the sect was an Udásí named Prítam Dás who
received some slight at a Kumbh bathing festival on the Gauges and
so started a new sect. His principal disciple was Guláb Dás, a Sikh
Ját, who had been a ghorchára or trooper in Maharaja Sher Singh's
army and joined the new sect on the collapse of the Sikh monarchy.
He compiled the scripture called Updes Bilás, and it is his tomb at
Chattián wála which is resorted to by his disciples. Mr. Maclagan
added :-
“The Gulábdásís have thrown over asceticism and have proceeded
to the other extreme. They originally held that all tbat was visible
in the universe was God, and that there was no other. It is said that
Guláb Dás declared himself to be Brahm and many of his disciples
believe themselves to be God; and, properly speaking, their faith is
that man is of the same substance as the deity, and will be absorbed
in him, but for the most part they are looked on by their neighbours
as denying the existence of God altogether. They do not believe in
a personal future life, and dispense with the veneration of saints
and with pilgrimages and religious ceremonies of all kinds. Pleasure
alone is their aim; and renouncing all higher objects they seek only
for the gratification of the senses, for costly dress and tobacco, wine
and women, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. They are
scrupulously neat in their attire and engage in all worldly pursuits,
some of them being men of considerable wealth. They are said to have
an especial abhorrence for lying, and there is certainly little or no
hypocrisy in their tenets. In appearance they vary ; some always
wear white clothes; others preserve the Udásí dress; others are clothed
like the Nirmalas; and others are distinguished by being always shaved,
They are of course greatly distrusted and, to some extent, despised by
their co-religionists, and their numbers are said to be on the decrease.
The Gulábdásís are returned mainly from Lahore and Jullundur.*
They admit any caste to the sect, but the different castes admitted
do not eat with each other or intermarry."
Guláb Dás abolished the kes or Sikh fashion of wearing the bair,
allowed bis followers to smoka and only acknowledged sach passages
* They are also found in Amritsar ard Ferozepore and have denras in Aubála and
Karnál,



320
Gulahird-Gurcháni.
of the Granth as accorded with his own views. The Gulábdásís do not
frequent the ordinary fairs, but have a large gathering of their own,
which lasts six days, during the Holi. The author of the Panjabi
Dictionary says that Guláb Dás inclined on the whole towards
pantheism.
GULAHIRA, fem. -í, a vagabond.
GULÁM, see Ghulam.
GULERAB, see Golera.
GULHARI, GULHARIA, a section of the Aroſás, a man of that section, (Panjabi
Dicty., p. 410).
GUmhár, see Kumhár.
Gumrání, a clan of Patháns found in the Nowshera tahsil of Pesháwar.
GUNDI-NAWAZAN, the 'white' party in the Marwat plain of Bannu ; see under
Spin. The 'black' or Tor party is known as the Gundi-Abezar.
GUNJíAL, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Goráhá,' a tribe of Jáțs who were originally Rájputs. They claim to have
acquired their lands from Nawab Gházi Khán to whom they presented
a valuable horse, and he gave them as much land as they could compass
in a day and a night': (Panjábi Dicty., p. 415).
GURAYA, see Goráya.
GORBUZ, an unimportant Pathán tribe, which accompanied the WAZIR in
their movements, and once occupied the hills between their Mabsúd
and Darvesh Khel brethren, where they disputed the possession of the
Ghabbar peak with the Bitanni. They have now returned to their
original seat west of the Khost range and north of the Dawari, who
hold the trans-border banks of the Tochi river.
GUBCHÁNI, an organized BALOCH tuman, own the Mári and Drágal
hills, and their boundary extends further into the mountains than that
of any other of the tribes subject to.us; while their territory does not
extend much to the east of the Sulaimáns. They are divided into eleven
claus, of which the chief are the Durkáni, Shekáni Lashári (a sub-
tuman), Pitál, Jisatkáni, and Sabzáni. The last four are true Baloch
and the last three Rinds ;* the remainder of the tribe being said to have
descended from Gorish, a grandson of Raja Bhímson of Haidarábád,
who was adopted by the Baloch and married among them. He is
said to bave accompanied Humáyún to Delhi, and on his return to
have collected a Baloch following and ejected the Pathán holders from
the present Gurcháni holdings. It is not impossible that a consider-
able number of the Lashári clan, who are not too proud of their affilia-
tion to the Gurcháni, may bave returned themselves as Lashári simply,
and so have been included in the Lasbári tribe. The whole of tbe
Durkáni and about balf of the Lashári live beyond our border, and are
not subject to us save through their connection with the tribe. The
* Dames' account is different. He says that the principal part of the tribe is Dodai, the
Syábphádh Durkáni being Rinds, and the Pitáfi, Jogáni and Cháng are probably partly
Rinds : while the Lasháris (except the Gahols and Bhands) and the Jistkánis are
Lasháris; and the Suhriánis and Holawánis aro Bulethis.



Gürdali-Gutká.
321
latter is the most turbulent of all the clans, and they and the Pitáfi
used to rival the Khosa tribe in lawlessness of conduct. They were
given fresh lands prior to 1881 and gradually settled down. They are
only found in Dera Gházi, and have their head-quarters at Lalgarh,
near Harrand, in that District. There is also a Gurcháni clan among
the Lunds of Sori.
Gurdali, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Gurke, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Gurkhí.—The ruling and military race of Nepál, only found in the Panjab
as members of our Gurkha regiments. The Gurkha invasion will be
found described in the Sirmúr Gazetteer, pp. 16-18, the Simla
Gazetteer, and the Kángra Settlement Report, by Sir James Lyali, $ 82,
but it left practically no traces on the ethnic elements of the Punjab
Himalayas. The Gurkhas are of mixed Aryan and Mongolian blood.
An interesting account of them will be found in Hodgson's Essays,
and their organisation which in some respects closely roproduces
phenomena found in the Hindu castes of the Punjab, is described in
Vansittart's work.
GORMANG.—An insignificant class of criminals found in the Ráwalpindi
district, where some of them are regisiored as criminals,
GURMÁNI, a Baloch tribe scattered through Deras Gbázi and Ismáíl Khan
and Muzaffargarh.
GORRA OR CHAMARWA.-Tho Brahmaps who minister to the Chamárs, Aheris,
and other outcasts. They are not recognized as Brahmans by the other
classes; and though they wear the sacred thread it is perhaps possible
that their claim to Brahman origin is unfounded. Yet on the whole it
seems most probable that they are true Brahmans by descent, but have
fallen from their high position. They are often called Chamarwa súdhs.
Goron, a Hindu Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
GORZ MÁR or Rufái.-One of the irregular Muhammadan orders, said to
have been founded by one Sayyid Ahmad Kabír. It is so called from
the fact that its members excite the compassion of the public by
beating their breasts with studded maces (gurz). They also carry
about iron chains which they handle when red-hot, and knives and
daggers and needles which they thrust through their flesh. The
author of the Qánún-j-Islám (a book relating to Southern India)
gives some details of their powers: “ they level blows at their backs
with their swords, thrust a spit through their sides or into their eyes,
both of which they take out and put in again; or cut out their tongnis.
which, on being replaced in their moutbs, reunite. Nav, they eveni
sever the head froin the body and glne them together again with
saliva," and so on, ad nauseam.
Gorká, a small sept, some 60 souls in number, of the Bhall section of the
Játs found in Hadiára, a village in Lahore. They are descendants of
ove Gurbakhsh Singh, a Sikh Já¢ who earned the nickname of Gutká
(" a collection of all that is bad”) by bis thieving propensities not long
before the British conquest of the Punjab. He owned little land, and
poverty compelled his descendants to continue his career of crime.



322
Gyáni-Gwar.
GYÁni, one possessing divine knowledge, a sage, from gyán, divino know-
ledge or religious meditation; among the Sikhs a traditional interpreter
of the Grar..
GYAZBINGPA, see Cháhzang.
Gwálá, an occupational term for a Hindu cowherd and shepherd. In the
Punjab a Hindu milkman, butter-maker and cowherd is called a gwálá
and is generally by caste an Ahír* ; but if a Muhammadan, he would
be called a ghosi and is often a Gujar by tribe. The Abír gwálás of
the Punjab used to buy milk largely of the ghosis for butter-making,
of which they had the monopoly. Till the Mutiny the ghosis were
simply milk-sellers, but after it they took to butter-making also.
Hindus will buy milk of a Hindu gwálá, or a Muhammadan ghosi, but
not of the latter if water has been mixed with the milk, as the water
would defile them. When gwálás purchase milk of Muhammadan
ghosis to make butter they are supposed to see the cow milked.
GwÁR, Gwária, a nomad caste of Hindus, low in the social scale, and said
to be broken-down Banjáras, who having lost their cattle and other
property have taken to wicker work and lead a gipsy existence. But
other accounts make them an offshoot of the Sánsis or Nats. They
also make sirki or screens of reed and set millstones. In Hissár
popular legend makes them descendants of a Bhíl woman by a Rájpat,
and in this District they are settled in Hánsi and Bhiwáni tahsils,
engaged in ordinary labour as well as mat-making, and described
as intermarrying with Banjáras. They are confined to the south-east
Districts of the Punjab.
* For the Gwalbans of the Ahírs see under Ahir,
† Possibly Gawár, q.v.



323
H.
Habiási, a synonym of Kóka.
Hadi, & general labourer who makes bricks, carries earth, vegetables, etc.,
for hire, in Kángļa. He resembles in some respects the Kumhár in
the plains.
HADWÁL, a numerous and powerful tribe in the territories of Kashmir and
rivals of the JUNBÁLS.
H AIBOKE, a Kbarral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
HAJÁRí, see HAZÁRA.
HAJAOLI, the name by which a branch of the Ghumman Játs is known.
It is of Rájput status, and is descended from Harpál and Ranpál,
two of the three sons of Jodha. The third son, Sanpál, espoused
twenty-two wives of various castes, and so the Hujauſis, who remained
Rájputs, refused to intermarry with their children and they sank to
Ját status.*
HAJJÁM, a barber ; see Náí.
HAJÚÁH (Rájputs), a branch of the Rájpots, apparently extinct, from whom
the Ghumman, Hajúáh, Khira, Tatli and Wains Ját tribes claim to
be descended.t
HAJRÁ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in (Multán, probably Hijrá or Hinjra).
Hakím, a Jág clan (agricultoral) found in Multán.
HAKLá, a section of the Gujars.
The Haklás of Gujrát boast origin even more exalted than the
Gujars of Rajput blood, for they claim descent from Alexander the
Great and give the following pedigree :-
ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
Gang, grandson, held Kborásán.
Rájá Jagdeo of Mathra, which his descendants ruled for 14 generations.
Rájá Nand Pál.I
Godan.
Masa
Dhol.
Dhol.
Dhor.
Raja Bhamána.
Bajá Sangána, raler of Mathra and Narwarkot.
Rájá Hik.
Rájá Baru, founder of Barnáli in 1009.
Grandson, dethroned by Muhammad of Ghor,
* Amin Ohand's Hist. of the Sialkot Dist., pp. 45-6. This account of the Chaman
(Ghumman) tribe adds that the genuine Bajoali (sic) Rájputs are still to be found in
Rawalpiudi and Jhelum.
7Aist. of Sialkot, pp 21, 22. 24, 211 and 29. [? A misprint for Bajwa.7
1 In Ludhiána the tradition is that Rájé Garb of Mathra had two sons, Dara (whore
descendants became Rájputs) and Nand Mahr, who settled in Guzerat and thus became
the progenitor of the Gujars, by a woman of Guzerat, who bore him 19 sons.



324
Hál -Háli.
As Rajputs the Haklás claim to be. Panwórs, and derive their name
from Rájá Hik or Hikdar who overran all India' and was king of
Rajputána. Rájá Baru, however, held the Jatch Doáb and Mathra, but
Muhammad of Ghor deposed his son and grandson for aiding Khusrau
Malik, last of the Ghaznivides.* Under the Sikbs the Haklás again
rose to some power. Their chief, Chandu Ahmad Khán recovered
Zamán Shah Abdáli's guns from the Jhelum for Ranjít Singh and
received a grant of Barnáli and Bhágo, with Rs. 25,000 & year. His
grandson, Mihr Ali, sided with the British at Chilianwala.
Hál, a tribe of Játs which once held the tract now occupied by the Lillas
in the Jhelum Thal, but now reduced to a few families. Extensive
mounds west of Lilla village mark the site of their ancient settlement.
HALÁL-KHOR, a term applied to a converted sweeper, Chubrá, or any other
ontcaste who has embraced Islám and only eats what is permissible
under its law. Properly, according to the Panjabi Dicty., p. 424, halálo
khor, 'one who eats carrion.'
HALÁWAT, see. Ahláwat.
Háli, the skicner and dresser of hides among the Gaddi tribes. He also
makes shoes and weaves baskets of hill bamboo, and makes green leaf
platters. Occasionally the Háli removes nightsoil. The Hális are
the most numerous and important of the menial castes throughout
Chamba and are chiefly employed in field labour, either as farm-
servants to the higher càstes or as tenants. They also weave pattu
or woollen stuff. The following is a list of the Hali gots found in
Kángļa :-
Badhora.
Khawal.
Bádi.t
Khripár.
Basiúra.
Kharere.
Chilkhwán.
Dhulkán,
Marenu.
Ghahi.
Mhahan.
Ghelán.
Pachrán.
Jurgbo.
Rámsán.
Khán.
Rihání.
Kardocha.
Torain.
The Hális are, or claim to be, endogamous, and would not at any rato
give a daughter to a Bádi (who was not a Háli), a Dhaugri, a Rihára
or a Sippi." Marriage is both infant and adult. A man may espouse
his wife's sister. Sexual license before marriage is not tolerated, even
in the case of a ghar-juantrú (the ghar-jawái or resident son-in-law of
the plains). Hális follow the Gaddi wedding customs. The plaiting of
the bridh's hair before the bed rite is dono by the bride's mother and
is called khrâru sir. That done after it is done by her mother-in-law
and is called suhagan sir. Polygamy is allowed and so is divorce.
A divorcée can remarry, but a widow may not esponse her husband's
elder brother. Widow remarriage is celebrated by the women's putting
a dori on the bride, and her husband's placing a bála in her nose.
Kodho.
* Yet the Haklás are said to have accompanied Muhammad of Ghor when he conquered
Herst (s the Herát tract in the modern District of Gujrat moaut p) For a ballad
composed by a mirási of the Haklás see Indian Antiquary, 1908, p. 209.
+ Apparently a separate caste.



Hanllan–Handáli.
325
HALLAN, a Mahtam clan (agricultoral) found in Montgomery.
Halwái, & confectioner, fr. halwá, a sweetmeat made of four, ghi and sugar.
HAMANDKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
HAMAR, 8 Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán tahsil.
Hamárá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Maltán.
HAMAȚo, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
HAMDÁNI, a Sayyid olan (agrioultural) found in Montgomery and Amritsar.
Hamdí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
HAMOKá, an agrioultural clan found in Shahpur.
HAMsára, a neighbour, a client: as applied to a clan on the Frontier the
term implies clientship, subordination to a true Pathán clan, and,
usually, Hindki origin.
HAMSBílas, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán and in Babáwalpur.
HANBALI, one of the four great schools of doctrine of the Sunni Muham-
madans. Described by Mr. Maclagan as “ followers of Ibn Hanbal
(A. D. 780-885), chiefly confined to the neighbourhood of Baghdad
and not found in the Punjab-at least none have been entered in our..
Census returns." The modern Ahl-i-Hadís follow, to some extent, the
teachings of this school.
HANBI, & Ját tribe, which has one branch settled in the Gurcháni and
another in the Tibbi Lund country of tahsil Jámpur in Dera Gházi
Khán, where for purposes of tribal organization they are reckoned as
belonging to those tribes. The tribe has adopted Baloch manners,
customs* and dress.
HANDA, a Hindu Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
HÁNDA, a KHATRI got o section.
HaŅdal, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Kapurthala, Amritsar and in
Sialkot, where it claims solar Rájput orig and descent from Rám
Chandra. Handal, its eponym, lived in Ajudhia; and Šár, fifth in
descent from him, being outcasted migrated to the Amritsar district
in the Punjab and is descendants married Ját wives and took to
agriculture.
HANDÁL, a tribe of Játs.
Handálí, the third oldest sect of the Sikhs. The Handálí were the followers
of Bidhí Cband, son of Handált a Ját of the Manjha, who had been
converted by Amar Dás, the third Gurú. Bidhi Chand was apparently
a priest at Jandiála Gurú, in Amritsar, who was abandoned by his
followers on account of his union with a Muhammadan wife, and who
then devised a creed of his own. He compiled a granth and a janm-
sákhi, in which he endeavoured to exalt Handál to the rank of chief
apostle and relegate Gurú Nának to a second place,I representing him
a priest at Tamar Dás, the it a Ját of the Handál
* Punjab Customary Law, XVI, p. ii.
+ Hindál was the Guru's cook, but was appointed a masandi. Maclagan, $ 97.
Ho assigns Nának's birth to the month of Kátik.



326
Handye-Hánsi.
as a mere follower of Kabír. Bidhi Chand died in 1654 A. D. and
was succeeded by Deví Dás, his son by his Muhammadan wife. Under
Muhammadan persecution the Handálís denied they were Sikhs of
Nának,* and subsequently Ranjít Singh deprived them of their lands.
The Handálís are now called Niranjadis, or worshippers of God under
the name of Niranjan, " The Bright.” They reject all Hindu rites at
weddings and funerals, paying no reverence to Brabmans. They have
a special marriage rite of their own, and at funerals perform no kiria
karm or phul.
HANDYE, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Hánifia, one of the great schools of doctrine of the Sunni Muhammadans.
Mr. Maclagan described them as “ followers of the Imám Abu Hanifa
(A, D. 699-769), whose doctrines are distinguished by the latitudo
allowed to private judgment in the interpretation of the law. The
greater part of the Surnis of Northern India who belong to any school
at all belong to this. The founder of the school is known to his
followers as the Imám Azam or Great Imám, and our figures for
Hánilis include those who have returned themselves as adherents of the
Imám Azam.”
HAŅJan, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
HANJI, fem. -AN, a boatman, a caste in Kashmír.
HANJRA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery
(doubtless Hinjrá).
HANJRÁE, a Jág clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar (doubtless Pinjrá).
HANNI, a clan of the Kodai Karlánri Patháns, affiliated to the Mangal, but
of Sayyid origin. With the Mangal they left their Karlánri liome in
Birmil, crossed the Sulaimáns into the nodern Bannu and settled in the
valleys of the Kurram and Gambíla rivers. They were expelled by the
Bannúchi Patbáos a century later. Raverty, however, makes “ Honai”
and Wardag sons of Kodai's sister and adopted by him, but he relates
the story that a Sayyid, a pious Darvesh, Sayyid Muhammad, settled
among the Kaplárnai and other Pațbáns and took to wife a daughter
from the Karlárnai and two other tribes. The Sayyid origin of the
Hapni thus appears undoubted.
HANOTRAU, a Brahman sept which ministers to the Malhi Jáțs.
Háns, a small Ját clan found in Jind, Ludhiána, Multán and Montgomery.
In the latter District it has a Sidh, Bába Sulaimán, at Háns, to whom
bridal pairs make offerings. The name appears to be connected with
hans, a swan or goose.
HÁNSALAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
HÁNBABAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Hánsí, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
* Maclagad (8 97) says the gurús of the Niranjani actually took service with Ahmad Shah
Abdáli and thereby drew down on themselves terrible vengeance from Charat Singh as
early as 1762, when he attacked Jandiála.
tin these two latter districts it is classed both as Ját and Rájput (agricultural), but as
Ját, alone, in Multán, and in Ludhiana.



Haqiqi-Hárví.
327
Haqiqi, a sect doubtfully identified with the AHL-I-HADís; but ühe term
simply means "genuine" or "literal” and may refer to some other sect.
HARÁIKE, a sept of the Bhattis, found in Siálkot.
HARAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
HARDÁSIA, a small religious sect or order of faqirs.
HARGAN, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
Harí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán..
HARI, a tribe of Játs found in Jínd. They have a jathera at Shadi Hari and
out of a pond there cast seven handfuls of earth at the Dewali in his
name.
HARCHAND, & sept of Rájputs found in Hoshiarpur. It ranks below the
Dadwal.
HaripÁL-HARPÁIL (the latter is the older form), one of the three sons of
Dom or Dam, son or grandson of Jár and founder of the Haripál divi.
sion of the SHERANNI Patháns.
HÁRL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur (doubtless Harral).
Hární, fem. HARNIÁNI, a bighly criminal tribe, with a non-criminal minority,
found in the Ludhiána, Jullundur and Hoshiarpur districts.
· The Hárnís of Ludhiana have a curious tradition of descent from one
Najaf Khán, a Pathan, who was a friend of Sháh Abdul Karim of Giláp.
With his 8 sons Najaf Khán accompanied the saint in the army of
Mahmúd of Ghazní, receiving for his service lands at Mansúri near
Delhi. The sons married Hindu Rájput wives and thus became Rájputs.
Najaf Khán's descendants settled in various parts of India, those of bis
four' younger sons in Bhatner, Uch, Dhodúkoț and Multán, whence in
1671 A. D. they migrated into Kapúrthalá. At Harníán Khera, their
settlement in Bíkáner, the Bhattís among the Flárnís quarrelled, with
the Túr and Mandáhar septs, and were driven out. But they were
accompanied by those of their women who bad married into cther septs
and whose children. fed with them. Another version is that famine
drove them from Bíkáner.
However this may be, the Harnís became mercenaries of Rái Kalla
Kbán of Raikot: and he gave them several villages in jágír. ln return
they ravaged his enemies' lands, but when the Rái's family declined the
Hárnís' villages were handed over to the Kapúrthalá chief by Ranjit
Singh, and they themselves were soon banished from the State on
cbarges of killiag kine. This was in !818 and in 1847 they made an
unsuccessful petition to the British authorities to be reinstated in their
land. They were then allotted some waste land near Jagraon in the
Ludhiána distriet, but it was wholly inadequate for their support and
the Hárnís settled down to a life of crime, rapidly becoming expert
burglars and daring thieves. Almost every form of theft is attributed
to them, but they are peculiarly skilful in the form of burglary called
tápå which consists in jumping on to the roof of a house and snatching
the ornaments off its sleeping inmates. The Hárnís of Kírí in Ludhiána,
and two or three villages in Jullundur and Hoshiarpur are known as



Túr.
Pawánr.
828
Aárni gots.
Gaanímár* Hárnís. Their women used to enter the houses of well-to-
do people as servants, mistresses or even wives, and eventually plonder
them in collusion with their male relativos, who obtained access to the
house in the guise of faqirs,
In their own argot the Hárnís call themselves Báhli. Various expla-
nations of the name Hární are suggested : from herí, huntsman, from hør
& herd, and from hár a road. Others say that Rai Kalla so nick.named
them from hárni, a doe,' because they were his huntsmen. Probably
the word means thief:
The Hární gols are numerous, considering the smallness of their
numbers. The Hární genealogies are reported to be kept by the family
of Pír Shah Abdul Karim and all the information regarding them was
obtained in 1881-82 from the late Pír Zahúr-u 1-Din of Delhi, his
descendant.
Bhatti Sejpál.
Nárá or Chtajle or Bhatti Lakhanpál.
Shaikh-parhái.
Bhatti Bharipál or Rahmír.
Dhodúko or Dhuddike.
Rábmasurke.
Modábar.
Rábdír.
Gujjar.
Dhaddá.
Bhánas.
Awán.
Chauhan.
? Gbúniá or Ghúmiá.
Wálhá or Bahli.t
Ladhár.
Bhatti Phúskí.
Padhár.
Sangri.
Shádíwál.
Xache.
Lathik.
Múri.
Baki.
Jítang.
The curious point about these gots is that the forebear of each is
specified in the table of descent from Najaf Khán. All these gots are
descended from his four younger sons. To these must be added the
Gul and Pachenke gots found in Tappar and Kírí respectively. The
superiority of the Bhatří got is recognised by placing several cloths
over the corpse of one of its members on its journey to the grave :
other Hárnis have to be content with a single cloth.
By religion the Hároís are strict Muhammadans of the Qadiria and
Hanifia sects, it is said, and frequent the shrines of Shahi Sháh in
Gagra, of Hassu Sbáh in Tappar, of Zahir Wáli in Bodalwálá, besides
those of Shah Abdul Karim in Delhi, the Chishti shrine at Ajmer and
that of Taimúr Shah in Surat. The Hárpís do not, however, refrain
from liquor.
The male Hární averages 5 feet 7 inches in height, is well but not
heavily built, wiry and perfectly healthy. In disposition the tribe is
frank and out-spoken, and less secretive than other criminal tribes.
* Probably from gauni, the Hární word for road, and so meaning highwayman : or
possibly from gúní, theft.'
The Hárnís of Kíri are now well.beh aved, having given up thieving and taken to cultiva-
tion. The Gaunímárs are also said by their fellow Hárois to be so called because they slow
one of their women, named Gauni, on account of her frailty. For this reason, and also
because the Kiri Hárnís committed offences through their women, the otber Hájnis bave
fow dealings with Gaunímárs and rarely intermarry with them- a story which is wholly
incredible.
7 Cf. the Hárnís' own name for themselves, Babli,



329
Harpál-Hatikhei.
From boyhood habits of endurance and activity are inculcated and a
Hární man will walk 30 or 40 miles in a single night in carrying out a
burglary.
HARPÁL, a branch of the Awán..
HARRAL, a Rájput tribe, which claims to be descended from the same
ancestor, Rái Bhúpa, as the Kharral, but by another son ; and to be
Punwar Rajputs who came from Jaisalmer to Uch, and thence to
Kamália in the Montgomery district. Mr. Steedman said that in Jhang,
where only they are found on the left bank of the Upper Cheuáb,
tradition makes them a branch of the Ahírs, and that they are almost
the worst thieves in the district, owning large flocks and herds which
they pasture in the central steppes, and being bad cultivators. Another
account says they were originally Bhúțțá Játs settled at Matela, a
village in Shahpur, whence they migrated under their Pír, Shah
Daulat. As strict Muhammadans they employ po Brahmans and will
not eat anything left by one who does not perform the daily nimáz.
Marriage within the tribe is preferred, but is allowed with Bains,
Gondal, Sindhan Játs, Lalis, Laks, Kharrals, etc. In Montgomery the
Harral (Harl) are classed as a Ját (agricultural) tribe. They are all
Muhammadans in this District.
Hásai, ap agricultural clan found in Shábpur.
Hasám, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
HASANI, seu SAYYID.
Hasan Kael, a well known sept of the Adam Khel Afrídis, which with the
Jawakki occupies the range between Kohát and Peshawar, from Akor,
west of the Kohát Pass to the Khatak boundary. Thu Hasan Khel
hold the southern border of the Pesháwar district.
HASNÁNA, a clan of the Siáls.
Hassant, a Baloch tribe of uncertain origin which once held a large part of
the country now held by the Marris, by whom they were all but de-
stroyed. A fragment now forms a clan among the Khetrárs near the
Han Pass. Possibly Pathán by origin but more probably Khetrán, the
remaining Hassadis speak Balochi.
HASSANZA, one of the three main sections of the Jadúns (Gadúns) in Hazára,
settled in and round Dhamtaur and in the Mangal and Bagra tracts. The
obsolete chieftainship of the Jadúns was vested in a family of this
section.
HATÁNO, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Hathár, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
HATIKKEL.-The most numerous, orderly and wealthy clan of the Ahmadzai.
branch of the Wazír Patháns settled in Bannu. It is divided into two
main branches, the Kaimal and Idal, the Kaimalkhel outnumbering the
Idalkhel by four to one. The Kaimalkhel has three chief sections,
Áli- or Khaidar Khel with a Patolkhel sub-section mostly found in the
hills), Músa and Purha Khels--all settled in the Marwat plain. The
Idalkhel have four sections Bai, Bakkar, Isá and Kaimal (II)-also
settled in the plain. The Sirkikhel is a small clan, now practically a



830
Hatiár-Bensi.
branch of the Hatikhel, with three main sections, Tohla, Bahla and
Shuni, all settled in the Bannu Thal.
HATIÁR, a tribe of Játs found in Gujrát and so called because they used to
practise female infanticide. They migrated from Shabpur to Gujrat in
Akbar's time.
HATTÁR, an agricultural clan found in Shábpur.
Hatríarí, a sept of the Bhattis, in Siálkoț, descended from Bhoni, 7th in
descent from Bhatti. One of Bhoni's descendants, Hai Dánu, in whose
family the custoin of female infanticide prevailed, had a daughter who
was rescued by a Brahman and kept by him for four years, but at
last, thinking that her father would be certain to kill her, if he ever
found her, he put ber to death himself, and the sept has become known
as Hattiári, lit. 'one guilty of killing a cow' or a Brabman.
Haule, a set of Brahmans who migrated with the Mairs from Jammú and
still receive small fees at weddings, etc., from the Chaudhriál of Chak-
wal. The weighman's business of that town is in their hands, but they
are still recognised by other Brahmaps as of that caste. Their name is
ascribed to their former dread (haul) of forcible conversion to Islám.
Hazába, a race usually but erroneously styled Pathan. They are almost
certainly Mongol Tartars, and durive their name from hazára, the
Persian equivalent of the Turki ming or “legion.” Settled in their
prosent abodes by Changiz Khán they hold the Paropamisus of the
ancients, from Kábul and Gbazoi to Herát and from Kaudahár to
Balkh. Owing to their strict rule of intermarriage they have retained
their physical and physiognomic characteristics and are "as pare
Mongols as when they settled over 600 years ago with their families,
their flocks and their worldly possessions." In the interior of their
country they were almost wholly independent until subdued by the late
Amír Abdur Rahmán of Afghánistán. They do not give their name
to the Hazára District of the North-West Frontier Province, por
apparently to the Chach-Hazára in the Attock tahsil.* The Hazáras
are not settled in the Punjab, but are found in it as labourers and
also eplist in Pioneer regiments. All are Sbias by sect, and in con-
sequence regarded as heretics by the Sunoi Afgháng. They are fully
described in Bellew's Races of Afghánistán.
HBHRÁJI, an obscure Bindu sect found in Multán.
HBxsl, Hesi, a low caste of professional musicians and dancers found in
Kullu and the Simla Hill States. Their women perform as dancing
girls. Tbey appear to be also called BEDA (or tho Beļas are a group
of the Hesis). In Spiti the Hesi appears to be also called Hesir (see
Chahzang) and RETA (incorrectly Batia) and there they form a low
caste, which is returned as Hindu, and which, like the Lohár, is
excluded from social intercourse with the other classes. Tke Hasi is
called 'the 18th caste,'t or the odd caste which is not required, for no
Seo Imperial Gazetteer, now ed. X, p. 115.
+ The 18th would apparently be the lowest caste or class. The expression reminds us of
the eighteen elements of the State' referred to in the Chamba inscriptions ; see tho
Archrological Survey Rep. for 1902.03, pp. 251 and 268.



Her-Hijra.
831
one will eat from his hands. Yet he too has his inferiors and professes
not to eat from the hands of a Lohár, or from those of a Náth, the
Kullu title for a Jogi. Ordinarily a beggar the Hesi sometimes
engages in petty trade, and to call a transaction a Hesi's bargain is to
imply that it is mean and paltry. In Lahul and Spiti the Hesi is the
only class that owns no land, and a proverb says: The Beda no land
and the dog no load.' The men play the pipes and kettle-drum and
the women dance and sing, and play the tambourine.
HER, Aher, or Poraw61.,* the third of the group of Ját tribes which includes
the Bhullar and Mán also. Their home appears to lie north of the Sutlej
and they are found in considerable numbers under the hills from Ambala
in the east to Gujrát in the west, and throughout the whole upper
valley of that river. Thera is a very old village called Her in the
Nakodar tahsil of Jullundur which is still held by Her Játs, who say
that they have lived there for a thousand years; in other words for an
indefinite period.
Herí, see AJERÍ.
HESI, see HENSI.
HESIR, see Chahzang.
HIJRA, (1) an important Ját clan, 2.9. HINJRÁ : (2) a eunuch, also called
khunsá, khojá, khusrá, mukhannas, or, if a dancing eunuch dressed
in woman's clothes, zankhá. Formerly employed by chiefs and
people of rank to act as custodians of their female apartments and
known as khwaja-sará, nawáb or nazir, they are still found in Rajputáoa
in this capacity. In the Punjab the hijra is usually % deradár, i.e.,
attached to a dera. He wears bangles on his wrists, and other
feminine ornaments. If dressed in white, he wears no turban, but a
shawl, and his hands are stained with henna. Hijras aff-ct the names
of men, but talk among themselves like women. They visit people's
houses when & son has been born to dance and play upon the flute,
receiving in return certain dues in cash and cloth. In some villages
they are found collected in chaukis,t and, like singing-girls, are
bidden to weddings. They act as butfoons, and are skilful dancers.
In a dera a chelá succee is his gurú, his accession being celebrated by
a feast to the other inmates of the dera. The hijrás are all Muham.
madaos, and especially affect Shaikh Abdul Qádir Muhi-ud-Din
Jiláni. At the Muharram they make túzius. Hindus joining the
fraternity become Mubammadans.
The eunuchs of the Punjab have divided the Province into regular beats from which birt
or dues are collected. Pánipat contains a typical Hijrá fraternity. In that town they live
in a pakka house in the street of the Muhammadan Báolis and, though retaining men's
names, dress like women and call one another by such names as misi, mother's sister,'
phuphi, 'aunt,' and so on. The pərmanent residents of this abode only number 7 or 8, but
* As regards this name the following tale is told :-
A Mirási happened to meet some children of the Mán, Bhullar and Her tribes pasturing
cattle. Those of the two former tribes were in charge of boys, those of the latter in
charge of girls, and so he asked them which of their tribes was the chief. The boys
answered ironically that the Porawál, who had sent their cattle out in charge of girls, wero
chiof. Owing to their custom of so doing the Her Játs were only regarded as halt a tribo,
and the other two tribes refused to marry with them. The Dhariwál are also called Phor.
+ The chanki appears to be much the same as a dera,



332
Eunuchs,
an urs or anniversary is held at which a fairly large number collect. They also observe the
Holi and Dasehra. But the largest gathering takes place on the occasion of a gadi nashini
or succession to the office of headman, when some 200 assemble.
It is commonly asserted that no one has ever seen the funeral of a eunuch; and the super
stitious belief is that when about to die they disappear. They are, as a rule, long-lived,
well-built, and, being so few, deaths among them cannot be frequent. Eunuchs dread a
dead body, and when one of them dies none of them dare approach the corpse. All that
they will do is to cry and weep like women, and it devolves by custom on their Bádhi
neighbours to wash the dead body and carry it to the graveyard. As the eunuchs are
looked upon as impure, the Bidhis never a imit that they serve as their coffin-bearors and
the popular superstition is thus strengthened.
Eunuchs are admitted into the fraternity from all castes; e. 9., Sayyid, Shaikh, Gujar,
Juláha, etc. One of them, Sáhib Ján, a pious man, who died at the age of 100 in Mecca,
was a Brahman. All are, or become, Muhammadans. They have a rite of initiation, which
they term chádur urhna (donning the sheet), but the proceedings are kept secret * None of
the eunuchs now in Panipat are natives of the town. Two or three men of Panipat who
became eunuchs had to go to Patiala for initiation and to earn a livelihood. It is admitted
by the eunuchs that no person is born a hijra, and the common belief that children are so
born seems to be wrong; none can say that he has ever seen such a child.T It appears to be
a fact that eunuchs are permanently unsexed, and it was vauntingly asserted that, however
rich their food may be, they are never 'intoxicated. They say:" We are broken vessels
and fit for nothing ; formerly we guarded the harems of kings-- how could they admit us
into the zanána if there was the least danger! We go into the houses of all, and never has
a eunuch looked upon a woman with a bad eye: we are like bullocks." How this is brought
about may be guessed, but the eunuchs say they get recruits from the zanána or zankha
class, who are impotent even before initiation. A meal known as Mír buchri ki khichri has
to be eaten by every initiate, and its effect is supposed to render a man impotent for life.
What the ingredients of this meal are no one knows. and the eunuchs themselves are reluc.
tant even to mention its name, saying that it was a myth, and who would dare to administer
such drugs now-a-days?
Another institution in Panipat is the zanána mandli, which comprises some 25 or 30
persons and is a weil-known class or circle in the town. It consists of adult and young men,
who flirt and pretená to imitate the gait of women. They learn to dance and sing, and pass
their days in indolence. They can be recognised by their mațak chál (behaving like females).
Each of them has a “husband." For some years past the zanánas have celebrated the Holi as
a carnival. They assume female names, by which they are called in their own circle. Most of
them are beardless youth; those who have beards shave them. Náz nakhra iflirtation) becomes
their second nature. There is no distinction between Hindu and Musalman in the mandli;
but most of its members are the latter : they wear narrow paijamas and a cap. In Delhi
also the zanánas are a recognised class: they hire kothas or the upper storeys of shops
like prostitutes They are invited to wedding parties, where they dance and act as
buffoons (nakkál), and their fees are high. Their 'friends' are sakkás (watermen), kunirás
(vegetable-men), and other low castes. The eunuchs speak of them tauntingly, and say
that all the members of the zanána-mandli are impotent men given to sodomy, though
some of them are married and have children. "They are prostitutes," remarked a eunuch
“if we acted like them, how could our jujmáns allow us to come near them ? . They have
deprived the prostitutes of their means of livelihood : we are not such."
Asked why they do not get more recruits from the zanánas, ihe eunuchs say that any
such attempt is resented by the relations of the laundas (boys) ; but if a stranger boy
comes and asks for admission they initiate him. It is alleged that the number of the
zunánus is on the increase in Panipat.
A eunich once initiated very seldom deserts the “ brotberhood." If a chela goes away
no other eunuch can keep him withont repaying his guru the expenses of bis initia.
tion and keep. And if he goes to the Kbojas the eunuchs are powerless. The Khojas
are a separate class who live in villages. They are married men with families, but earn
their livelihood by levying birt fees liką eunuchs. They employ a eunuch to dance for
them and play on the drum after him. If they cannot get a eunuch they get a boy of their
own to dance.
The eunuchs in Panipat are fairly well off. Their house is full of furniture and
necessaries, and they levy birt or charitable fees on certain occasions. At a wedding or the
* Probably for excellent reasons : see the next foot-note.
† Eunuchs are undoubtedly made by mutilation. There is a custom of placing 5 rico
under the foot of the boy who is to be operated on. Apparently this is done to prevent raiza
88 a similar custom is believed to be followed at births,



Hindal-Hinjrá.
888
birth of a son thoy go to the family concerned, dance at the house and sing, and receive
Re. 1.4-0, or sometimes less. The zainindárs do not acknowledge them as their kamins
and they have no claims upon them; but persons of the lower castes, such as Telis, Rains,
Jhíwars, otc., dare not refuse them their fees, and every shopkeeper has to pay them oue
pice in the year.
Eunuchs do not aprear to be employed in mosques in the Punjab.*
HINDAL, a Muhammadan tribe found in Montgomery (doubtless Handal).
HINDRI, a generic terio, half contemptuous, applied to all Muhammadans,
who being of Hindu origin speak Hindko and have been converted to
Islám in comparatively recent times. In Bannu the term usually
denotes an Awán or Ját cultivator, but in a wider sense it includes ail
Muhammadans who talk Hindi, Panjabi or any dialect derived from
them. The local proverbst are not complimentary to the Hindki. Ode
says:-
(a) “If a Hindki cannot do you any harm, he will leave a bad smell
as he leaves you."
And again
(6) “ Though you duck a Hindki in the water he will come up with
a dry seat (hence he is lucky)."
(c) “ Get round a Pathán by coaxing; but wave a clod at a Hindki."
(d) “ Though a Hindki be your right arm, cut it off.”
Hindúbia, a Hindu Rájput sept of the 1st grade found in Hoshiarpur.
HINDWÁL, & synonym of Hindkí.
HINDWÁL, apparently a sub-tribe of Tanáolis in Hazára : but probably
only a variant for HINDKI. .
Hindwánan, a Jág clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
HINJRÁ, HIŃJRÁI, HINJRÁONI (or, incorrectly, Hijrá), (1), an important Ját
tribe, indigenous to the Gujranwala Bár. Once a pastoral tribe, perhaps of
aboriginal extraction, they own 37 villages in Gujranwala which is their
home, but have spread both east and west under the hills. They claim
to be Saroha Rajputs by origin and say that their ancestor Hinjraon
came from the neighbourhood of Hissár to the Hátizábád pargana in
Gujranwala and founded a city called Uskhab, the ruins of which still
exist. Their immediate ancestors were Mal and Dhol, and they say
that half their clans still live in the Hissár country.
in The Porsians in remote times were waited by eunuchs as we learn from Herodotus
(lib. 6) and some attributo to then their invention. But Ammianus Marcellinus (lib. 14)
ascribes it to Semiramis. In Al Islám the employment of such persons about the mosque
is a bidaat or customn unknown in the time of the Prophet. It is said to havo arisen from
the following three considerations : that (i) these people are concentrated in their profession :
Cij they must see and touch strange women at the shrines: and (iii) the shrines are
harim or sacred, having adyta which are kept secret from the prying eyes of men, and.
therefore, should be served by eunuchs. It is strange that the Roman Catholic Church, as
well as the Moslem mosque, should have admitted such an abomination. Though the
principal of the mosque, or shaikh al-harion, is no longer a neuter... ..... his náib or deputy
is a black eunuch, the chief of the aghawat, upon a pay of 5,000 piastres a month. From
Burton's Pilgrimage to al. Madinah and Mecca, vol. I, p. 371, Burton goes on to describe the
organisation of tho. attendants of the mosque at Medinah, who are all eunuchs.
7 Thorburn's Bannu, p. 245 note; pp. 246, 247, 250 and 254,
* The original form of the word must have been Hinjráma ; cf. Jagráma, now Jagrion,
gråma, now grdon.
8 Or Kaholia, according to the Hist, of Sialkot, p. 26.



834
Kir
flusแรณ์,
(2) A clan of the Muhammadan Pachádas, found in Hissár,* and also
claiming desoent from Saroha Rájputs.
The Hinjrá are also found in Shahpur, as an agricultural cian, and
in Montgomery, in which laiter District they are all Hindus.
Hír, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery (doubtless
Her).
HIRáj, one of the principal clans of the Siyals.
HIBRA, a Khokhar clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
Hitaárí, the inhabitants of the Hithár.
HLONDUKPA (fr. Hlo, 'Bhutáo'), a Buddhist sect, fonnded in the 15th century
by N(g)a(k)uang Namgial : Ramsay, Dicty. of Western Tibot, p. 83.
See also under Drugpa.
HoLí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Honai, see Hanni.
HONDAL, a Ját tribe, found in Siálkot, where they claim Súrajbansi Rájput
origin and say that Sarb, their ancestor, migrated from Ajudbia to
Aurritsar, whence his descendants oame to Sialkot. They are governed
by the chundavand rule of inheritance.
Hoạri, a Já¢ clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
HORAR, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Hot, one of the original main sections of the BALOCB and very widespread.
They still form a powerful tribe in Mekrán and ruled at Dera Ismail
Kbán for 200 years. Part of the Khosa tribe and the Bálácháni Mazá.
ris are said to be of Hot descent, anil they are also found wherever
Baloch have spread. In Montgomery tahsil they are classed as an
agricultural clan, and are also found in Lyallpur.
HOTAK, one of the two great divisions of the Gugiáni Patháng.
HUBAIRIAN, one of the Súfi sects, founded by Khwaja Hubaira Basari, whose
shrine is at Marash in Turkey.
HÚDA, SÚda, a Ját tribe found in the Rohtak and Sámpla tahsils. It claims
Chauhán Rájput origin and descent from one Súdal, who settled some 35
generations ago in Rewárí (where the people intercharge 3 and h).
HUJJhan, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Horal, a Alubammadan Ját clan (agricultoral) found in Montgomery
(doubtless Harral).
Husainí, a Sayyid clap (agricultural) found in Montgomery. See under
Sayyid. For the Husaini Brahmans see uuder Brahman, supra.
• Hindu Hinjráon Pachádas are also said to be found, but not in Hissár.



335
ICH BAR, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
IchbJADRÁRI, one who follows his own desires in all things, possibly a
Galábdásí.
ICHERAL, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
IDAL, see under Hatikhel.
Idia, see under Utmánzai.
Ikwán, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
ILIÁszal, one of the main divisions of the Yusufzai Pathans. They hold
western Buner.
IMÁmia, a synonym of Shia : one who believes that the Muhammadan
religion consists in recognition of the true Imám.
INDAURIA, -(1) A sept of 2nd grade Hindu Rájputs in Kángra, among whom
all sons inherit equally in the bás or residential estates, while the
remainder, called the chaudhár go to the eldest son as chaudhri, thoogh
the custom is now disputed. (2) Ao al or sept of Gaur Brahmaps found
in Gurgaon. They are parohits of the Lohain Játs. In both cases the
name is territorial.
Irání, an inhabitant of Irán: sometimes used as equivalent to QIZZILBÁSH.
Also Iráui, or Baloch.--According to Mr. J. P. Warburton the gypsies
of Central Asia who migrate between Asiatic Turkey and the extreme
south and east of India. They are sometimes to be met with in the
cold weather with herds of sorry popies, and earn a living by selling
sham ancient or foreign coins, Brummagem ware and trinkets, and by
fortune-telling. Audacious frauds and cheats, they have the impadent
and truculent dameanour of the Sápsi and like them are good linguists
and very loquacious. They are also addicted to open pillage and the
village folk are afraid of them.
Isá Kael, (1) the branch of the Niázi tribe of the Patháns, which gives its
name to the Isá Khel tahsil of Mián wáli.
The following pedigree is preserved in an unpublished work, entitled
the Tazkara-i. Afgháni which was compiled under the supervision of
Ahmad Khán, 1sá Kbel, about a century ago :--
LUDHI.
Niazi.
Khakú, by a lady
denceodod from
Patan.
Jamál, by Zakia, a
lady descended
from Prangi,
Babi, by a Sarwani
Afghán wife.
Wagan.
Bapáni. Heidar, Machan. Mosháni. Mahyár. Sirbáng.
Hamim.
Tér.
Jám or Zám.
Khir,
Omr.
โkin



836
Ísá Khel pedigrees.
But the Makhzan-í-Afgháni gives the following table of descent*.
SHÁR HUSAIN.
Lodhi.
A
Dotanni,
Dotanni,
Sigáni.
Niazi.
sigáni.
Khaku.
Mah'yár.
Babi.
Jám of Zám.
Arad.
Kbitr. Mán.
Te
Kundi.
Súd.
Sarháng
Ali
sád.
Daulat.
Jakki.
Marhal.
led.
Khán.
Sumbal.
Binder.
Hamim.
Lele or Lelah Niári.
* It will be noticed that Jamál has here been confused with Jám or Zám. Jamál was the
son of Niázi. It is highly improbable that Isá Khán, a contemporary of Sher Bháb Súr and
Salim Sháh Súr, was a grandson of Niázi.
The present Kháns are thus descended from Isá Khán :-
18A KHAN.
Zakhú Khán, the Zakhú Khe branch is named after him.
Kbwája.
Dalu Khán.
Sher Khán.
Diláwar Kbán.
Bairám Khán.
Fateh Khán.
Jhang Khán.
Dall Khán.
Khán Zamíp Khán (or Muhammad Zamin Khán).
Umar Kbán. BBEA
Muhammad Kbáo.
Ahmad Khán.
Muhammad
Slam Khip.
Shab. Muhammad Mubam. Maham. Zulfiqar
nawáz Ajaz mad Sar: mad Ab- Khán.
Khán. Kháu. faraz dulla Khan,
Khán. acknowledged
chief of the
Isá Khel,
Abdul Muhammad
Sattár Abdul
Khán. Aziz Khán.



and Med the Gamountain
Tsázai- Ithwál.
337
Raverty, on the other hand, writes that Jám or Jál, son of Niázi, had
by his three wives seven sons, viz., Isá, Ali and Daulat, by the first :
Sunbal and Pindár or Pandár, by the second ; and Maſhal and Jalai or
Jakai, by the third. But another account gives Jám an eighth son,
Khán, and adds that Jám, had two brothers, Bai and Kháko. From
the latter are descended the Sahrángs of Míánwali, the Mahgárs, Mí-
chan Khel, the Musiáni Isá Khel, and the Kundi*, who are confined to
Țánk. The earlier history of the Isá Khel belongs to that of the
Niázis, but, it may be noted, they were in pussession of the Khusháb
pargana of the Sind-Ságar Sarkár before the close of the 16th century,
and prior to that period Bábar allades to their village of Isá Khel as
concerned in a night attack on his camp in 1505 A. D.
(2) There is also an Isá Khel sub-division of the Tarakzai branch of
the Bar Mohmands on the Peshawar border.
Isáknel, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Is ázal, one of the principal clans of the YÚSUFZAI Patháns. They hold
the north-east slopes of Mahában and the mountainous country on
both sides of the Iudus in Hazára and the Gadún valley. They have
three clans, Hassanzai, Akazai and Medu Khel in Hazára, and in 1907
elected a Khán to their vacant Khánship.t
ISEKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
IsEzaí, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
IS HÁQZA1, one of the four main clans of the Khalíls in Pesháwar.
IsmáílKHEL, a clan of Patháns found in Pesháwar.
ISMÁLZAI, a sept of the Kamálzai clan of the Usmánzai branch of the
MANDAur Patháds fouud in Pesháwar.
Isp, see under Wazír.
Isot, Sot, an offshoot of the great Panni tribe of the Afgháns which
formerly held a great paru of Siwí or Síhístán. Their lands lie west
of the Jáfi! Pathans on the Dera Ismail Khán border.
ISPERKA, one of the five clans of the Ahmadzai branch of the Wazír Patháns
settled in Bannu. Its main divisions are the Muhammad Khel, who
now rank as an independent clan, and Sudankhel and Saddakhel who
alone are now termed Isperka. The tribal land of the Muhammad
Khel is divided into four tarafs or shares of which one is held by the
Shudakai, an affiliated Khel from the remnant of some old hill Tribe
which cannot trace descent from Isperka. The Sudankhel has four
sections, Baghlan, Bokul, Kundi and Bharrat, with a fifth called Dhir.
affiliated hamsáyas of another stock.
ITHwál, the ITawal or UTHWÁL, according to the late Sir Denzil Ibbetson.
seem to be found chiefly in Ambála, Ludhiána, Jullundur, and the ad.
joining territory of Patiala. But unless two distinct names have been
confused, they have a curiously large colony in Delhi, which appears
to be completely separated from that of Ambala. They are said to
be descended from a Súrajbansi Rájpuü called Maharaj who received
the nickname of Unthwal from his love for camel-riding.
* Said to practise vesh.
| Hazára Gazetteer, 1907, p. 185.



339
JABAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
JABLI, a group of Sayyid families found near Kahror in Maltán. so called
from some mountain (jabl) in Arabia.
JABOKE, (1) a Kharral clan and (2) a Muhammadan Ját olan (both agri-
cultural) found in Montgomery.
JÁCHAK, a beggar, an examiner, a prover,* from jách, guessing, an
estimato, trial or skill.t The word JÁJAK appears to be a corruption
of Jáchak.
JÁR, JÁR, Zád or Zar, a group or class of Kanets found in Kanáwar and
comprising many khels or sopts. But other Kanets do not form matri.
monial alliances with them, because they are considered of low status.
JADRÁN, JANDRÁy, one of the sections of the Balá or Upper Bangash tribe of
the MANGALI Pagháns settled in Kurram, on the borders of Khost.
JÁDÓ, JÁDÚBANSI, a Rájput tribe of Lunar race, who are called by Tod
" the most illustrious of all the tribes of Ind." But the name has
been almost overshadowed by Bhatti, the title of their dominant branch
in modern times. They are returned chiefly from Delhi and the south
of Patiala.
JADUN, see Gadún. The form Jadún is clearly the later, and it is impossible
to follow Jamest in identifying the Jadún with the Jádú or Yádú
Rájputs.
JÁrir, & weak Pathán tribe, which holds the village of Drug in the pass
of that name on the eastern slopes of the Sulaiman range. It is an
offshoot of the Miána Patháuis, being descended from Jáfar, one of the
thirteen sons of Miánai. With the Jáfar are found the Rawáni or
Raháni sept, descended from a brother of Jáfar. Jukes describes the
Jáfar Patháns as speaking Játki or Western Punjabi :8 (2, a Ját clan
(agricultural) found in Multán,
JÁPIRÁNI, a clan of the Bozdár Baloch.
Jáda," awakener," see under Bhát, but cf. Jbánga.
JÁOGEL, a clan of the Khosa Baloch.
JAG, a Muhammadan Ját olan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JAGAL, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JAGBDÁL, the Multáni and Balochi term for a Ját.
JAGLÁN, a tribe of Játs, found in Karnál. They are descended from Jagla,
a Ját of Jaipur, whose shrine at Isrána is worshipped by the whole
thápa or group of 12 Jaglán villages which forms the bárah of Naultha.
· Their ancestor is also worshipped at the village shrine called deh,
which is always surrounded by kaim trees, and if a woman wbo has
* Panjabi Dicty., p. 463.
+ Jukes' Western Panjabi and Eng. Dicty., p. 103.
| Pesháwar Settlement Report, 1862, § 17."
§ Jukes' Western Panjábi and Eng. Dicty., p. iv.



340
Jahánbar-Jain.
married into a Jaglán family, passes a kaim tree, she always veils her
face as if it were an elder relative of her husband. In Jind the Jaglán
are described as descendants of Jágu, founder of Jáglán ia Hissár.
JAHÁNBAR, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JARÁNBO, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JAHANGíbí, a dynasty of Sultáns who, according to Raverty, once ruled from
Nangrahár to the Jhelum, but, by the tiine the Kheshi Pathans over-
ran Swát, their sway did not extend far beyond the Indus on the
east. The last Sultan of Swat and of the Gibari tribe was Awes, a
son of Şultán Pakhal,* whose subjects, a Tájik rave known as Dihkáns
or Dihgáns, were expelled by the modern Swáti Patháns from Swát.
Saltán Awes retired northwards towards the sources of the Oxus and
for several generations he and his descendants ruled therein as far
as the frontier of Badakhshán after which they are suddenly lost
sight of, but the rulers of Chitral, Shighnán and Wákhán may be their
descendants, and like them, they claim descent from Alexander the
Great.+ The Jahángíri also appears to survive as a sept of ths Gibari.
JAHOJA, a Purbiá caste which keep milch cattle. It is Muhammadan in the
United Provinces.
JAI, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shujábád tahsil, Multán district. Its
eponym was a brother of Nún.
JAIKÁRI (A), a group of Rájputs, entitled to the salutation jai dia.
JAIKISHENI, see under Krishni.
JAIN, a generic term for all who affect the Jain religion, It is now
recognised that the Jain faith is older than Buddhism and that
Buddha's doctrines were probably adaptations or developinents of
Jain tenets. A full account of the Jains and their tenets would be
entirely beyond the scope of this article, and the following accounts of
the Jains as a religious community, in part from the pen of Lála Jas-
want Rai, a Jain of Hoshiarpur, are reproduced as giving, as far as
possible in the words of a Jain, an account of their representatives in
the Punjab.
"The Jains are so called as being the followers of the Jigast, Arhats
or Tirthankaras who were 24 in number, but they are also called
Saraogis, a corrupt form of Sharawaka or disciple' (sewak). They are
recruited from various groups of the Bauins, such as the Aggarwal,
Oswal, Shrímál aud Khanderwal, the last three of whom are also called
BÆÁBRAS-a corrupt form of Bhao-bhala (from bhao-motive and
bhala-good) or those of good intent'. Their chief aim is to injure
no living creature and to attain nirvána or peace. Among the Jains
it is a strict rule that no flesh or intoxicant shall be touched.
As a religious cominunity, the Jains are divided into two great sects,
viz., the Swetambara and Digambara.
SWETAMBARA. -The Swetambaras worship idols, which are often
adorned with gold and silver ornaments set with jewels, such as
* From whom Pakhli in Hazéra derives its name. He was a descendant of a Sultán
Bahrám.
† Raverty in his Trans. of the rabágát-i-Nasiri II, pp. 1043.4.
| The word Jina is derived from the Sanskrit root ja--to conquer, hence Jain means
conqueror'.
the Jainboyond the scaccount of its adaptationa Buddhism It is non



The Swetambara Jains.
341
Mukta, Angia, etc. They have their eight sacred days, viz., the
Pajusanas, beginning from the 12th badi to the 4th sudi (both days
inclusive) in Bhadon, the 8th day being called Chhamachhri, the
holiest day of the Jains. During these holy days, they spend much
time in reading and listening to their scriptures, the Sutras, and much
money in performing certain ceremonies in their temples and in saving
the lives of living creatures. During these days a fast is kept; some
fasting for one day, some for 2, 3, 4 and some for all the eight days."
Mr. Fagan writes that the Swetambaras believe that a woman.can
attain salvation (mukti), while other Jains hold that she must first be
born again as a man. In Bissár the principal caste which follows the
Swetambara doctrine is the Oswal BANIA.
The Swetambaras have ascetics who are thus initiated. A man who
wishes to become an ascetic must first live for some time with an
ascetic and become fully acquainted with the austerities which he will
have to undergo. On an auspicious day the Saraogis of the neighbour-
hood are invited. The candidate is then first robbed with batna*
(barley flour, oil and turmeric), and then bathed. He is now dressed
in handsome apparel, and, seated on an elephant, is carried in
procession through the 'bázár to a Jaio temple or such other place as
may have been made beforehand to resemble a Jain temple. There his
head is shaved, and his tator or guru, after performing certain
religious rites, gives him saffron clothes, the ugha or rajaharna (a kind
of brushing stick), the munh patti, (a piece of cloth placed before the
lips when speaking or reading), patras (wooden utensils) and a stick.
He accepts these things joyfully and makes the five following vows
(pancha mahabratas) of the Jain monk :-
1. • I take the vow not to destroy life (ahinsa).
2. I take the vow not to lie (asatya).
3. 1 take the vow not to take that which is not given (asteya).
4. I take the vow to abstain from sexual intercourse (brahm-
chárya).
5. I take the vow to renounce all interest in worldly things,
especially to call nothing my own (aparigraha).
Thus he becomes a monk and is often styled a sambegi sádhu.
A Sadhu has to walk barefoot; to use no conveyance when
travelling, to take no food or drink after sunset; to abstain from
touching a female; to refuse to accept uncooked vegetables, and only
to eat certain of them if cooked; to use, wooden utensils ; never to
prepare his own meals, but, always to beg food of his followers and
others; always to drink boiled water; never to give an opinion on any
worldly matter; and never to possess a farthing. In short, he has to
break off all connection with the world and lead the life of a strict
hermit.
The chief aim of the sádhu is to liberate himself from the bondage of
karma and thus obtain salvation,
In Hissár the priests of the Swetambaras are however called jati.
* As if he were a bridegroom.



342
The Dhundia Jains.
The sudhu* is in reality an ascetio of a different order to the jati
and their practices vary in important points.
Both orders adinit females, widows as well as unmarried women. The
main rules of the two orders are noted oelow :-
Sádhus.
Jatis.
1. A súdhu must touch nothing feminine 1. The jatis have no such restrictions.
whether human or animal. If he do so in-
advertently he must undergo certain rites of
expiation and be re-initiated. Conversely, a
sádhwi must touch nothing male.
2. Tho sádhus have no proselytizing zeal 2. The jatis are active in making converts
and admit no disciple who is not desirous of and sometimes buy children of destituto
entering the ordor.
parents making them disciples (chelas).
B, A sádhu must not touch coin, nor 3. The jatis have no such rules.
anything of metal or made of a combination
of metals. AU their ordinary utensils are of
wood.
4. The sádhus are itinerant monks, never 4. The jatis live permanently in uposar as
halting at any place save to recover from and do not regard itineration as a religious
fatigue, regain strength, or to preach to the duty.
people.
5 A sádhu must not use a razor or scis- | 5. The jatis have no such rulo.
sors and his hair therefore remains unshorn.
The hair of the beard may however be
broken, if it grow too long, but not more
than twice a year.
6. A sádhu may not wear shoes or ride. 6. The jatis may do both.
7. A sadhu may not travel by night. 17. This is permitted to a jatı.
8. Sådhus and sådhwis travel together, 8. Among jatis the men and women have
lodge in the same house, and study together | separate quarters (in the upásaras).
by night.
The sádhus are admittedly superior in religious merit to the jatis,
and if & jati meet a sádhu the former makes obeisance to the latter.
A sádhu may however read the sutrus with a learned jati.
In Bíkáner the sádhus have three sects :-Dhundia, Samegi and. Terapanthi.
Of the 84 sects or orders of the Jain priesthood or Samegi sådhus only
four appear to be represented in Bahawalpur and these are the Kharatara,
Tapa, Kanwala and Launka gachhas. There is an upásra or monastery
of jati gurus or celibate priests of these orders at Maujgarh, and pil.
grimages are also made to the upásras at Bíkáner, Rani, Rájgarh,
Šujangarh, Choru, Bídáspur, Sardár Shahr and Rajab Desar in Bíká.
ner State. Upásras are to be found at every locality where Oswáls live
in any numbers.
Dandia. Alexander Kinloch Forbes writes in his Hindu Annals of
the Province of Gujrát in Western India, that “this sect did not arise, it
is guid, before Sanibat 1700 (A.D. 1664)". They neither use temples nor
worship idols, they do not believe in all the Jain Scriptures, but only
in 32 scriptures and of even these in the text only. They disapprove of
commentarios, etc., and condemn the learning of Sanskrit grammar.
• Femining sádhwi, Jati is also the feminine form.



The Digambara Jains.
343
They too have eight sacred days, pajusanas. The Dhun dia ascetic is a
disgisting object, he wears a screen of cloth, munh-patti, tied over his.
mo'ith, his body and clothes are filthy and covered with vermin. The
Dhundia is also called sádhmárgé or thánakbási. He is initiated like
a sambegi sádhu with some differences in certain rites. The Dhundias
are divided into several sub-divisions such as Báís-tola, Jíva Panthí,
Ajíva Panthi, Tera Panthí, etc.
These sub-divisions origipated in this way :- The Lanka sub-division
of the Swetambaras was split up into three gaddis or schools, viz.,
Nagari, Gujarati, and Uttaradhi (northern). Under the influence of
22 gurus the Nagari became a large sect, distinct from the Swetambara
and indeed from all the other Jains. It became known as the Báis.
tola and eventually Dhundia. This schism occurred in 1909 Sambat.
In 1817 Sambat, however the Dhundias were in turn split up by the
defection of the Terapanthi or “sect of the 13." It has had 5 gurus
whose seat is Rájnagar in Bíkáner.
The Baís-tola reverences the 32 Sutras of Mabávír which form the
Jain scriptures, but the Terapanthís have a scripture of their own
consisting of 52 slokas. They refuse to protect an animal from the
attacks of another, bat the Báís-tola rise to open that height of regard
for life. The Terapanthís are on the whole more advanced, if more
heterodox, than the Baís-tola.
DIGAMBARAS.--The Digambaras worship naked idols and their monks
are also naked. They also keep fasts and have eight sacred days, called
athái, which occur every fourth month-in Asárha, Kártika and
Phálgun of each year. They have besides ten sacred days (called
the Das Lakshni), from Bhadon sudi 5th to 14th. Many of their tenets
agree with those of the Swetambaras. * They are divided into two
divisions, Bís-Panthi and Tera-Panthi.
The Bígpanthi reverence the 24 arhats, the Guru and the Shastras,
while the Terapanthi deny that there is any guru save the Shástras
themselves. “They clothe their idols, worship seated, burn lamps
before them, but present no flowers or fresh fruit to them, holding it to
be a sin to take away even vegetable life, though they will eat vege
tables if any one will give them ready cut and prepared for cooking,
while the Bíspanthí worship standing before naked idols, and refuse to
burn lamps before them.”
According to Professor Wilson they both deny the supremacy of a
guru and dispense with the ministrations of Brahmans, and according
to the same authority the' Bíspanthís are the orthodox Digambaras,
while the Terapantbís are dissenters. The Bíspanthís are the more
orthodox, and they are divided into four sub-sects-Nandi, Sen, Singh;
and Bír-called after the names of their Rishís. The Terapantbí
appear to be far the more numerous of the two.
The Jains in Hissár are thus described by Mr. P. J. Fagan :
- The Jains appear to revere the gods of the Hindu pantheon,
but reject the divine origin of the Vedas. Their supreme deity is
Nirankár, corresponding apparently with the Hindu Náráin, but their



844
The Jain sects.
t. Fagan de For Pujárítes of the panthis acient
immediate objects of reverence and worship are the 24 arhats or saints
who have obtained final union (mukti) with Nirankár. They do not
appear to reverence or feed the Brahmans, but they have sådhus or
priests of their own, and their pun on meritorious conduct consists to a
large extent in worshipping Nirankár and in feeding the sádhus. They
do not wear the janeo or sacred thread, they have a certain amount of
reverence for the cow; bathing is not considered any part of their
worship, nor do they appear to reverence the Ling, the symbol of Siva.
Their scriptures consist of the 32 Sutras written by Mahávír, the last
arhat. The leading principle of conduct inculcated by their religion
is abstention not alone from taking human life but from causing harm
to any kind of living creature (jiv)."
Mr. Fagan describes the Jains as“ divided into two main sections
Mandirpanthí (or Pujárí) and Dhundia-panthí, the former being suc-
cessors and representatives of the original Jains while the latter are a
schis natic offshoot. The Mandirpanthis are again sub-divided into
Swetambaras and Digambaras,' the ancient sects, of which the
former are the white-clothed' and the latter the sky-clad' or naked,
though they also wear tawny clothes. “The Swetambaras," to quote
from the late Sir Denzil Ibbetson, are somewhat less strict in their
observances than the. Digambaras: their ascetics will feed after
sunset, are said to use wine, and will eat out of a dish and from
the hands of any Hindu: whereas a Digambara devotee must have
his food placed in his hand by another of the faith. Various stories
are current as to the origin of the two sects. One account relates
how in the time of Chandra Gupta a l'amine fell upon the country
of Ujain, and how a part of the Jains there consented to accept
clothes, without which they were not allowed to enter into the city
to beg for alms, wbile the other section emigrated southwards rather
than abandon the nakedness which had till then been the common
rule of the faith. But the older and better account is that of the
23rd and 24th arhats, Párasnáth and Mahávír, who were probably
real persons and the actual founders of the Jain religion: the former
wore clothes, while the latter did not, and the disciples of each adopted
the example of their leaders."
: The least punctilious of the Jains are sometimes known by the
name of Márgí : they follow the path (múrg) of the Jains in some
particulars, such as in their scrupulous regard for animal life, but
in other respects revere Brahmans and follow the greater number
of Hindu prevalent practices. The word Márgi, however, is also
used as an euphemisın for Bám-márgí—those who follow the left-hand
path,
The History of the Jain Sects.
The Jains, as a body, have a remarkably complete historical and
religious literature which has been, or is being, thoroughly studied by
German scholars. Unfortunately the results are hardly yet available
in a form intelligible to any but specialists. Furtter, the Digambara
tenets, which are of great interest, are also contained in an extensive lit-
erature, but as their pandits preserve the old-world hostility to printing,
little bas as yet been published regarding them.



The Jain pontiffs.
345
To make clear what follows it should be noted that the 42 semi-divine
Jinas, whose series ends with Mahávíra, Mahábír, ('the great hero'), were
succeeded by a line of human teachers, called suris, a terın we may translate
by pontiff. Of these the first was, according to one sect (that of the
Kharatara gachha), Mahávíra himself, and his first disciple was Gotama
(Buddha), who did not however succeed him, Sadharmạn becoming the
second pontiff. The other sect, the Tapa gachha, regards Sudharman
as the first pontiff. Both these sects trace, though with some differ.
ences, the pontifical succession down to Uddbyotana, who founded the
84 gachhas* of the Jain (? caste) which still exist, and was 38th in
succession from Mahávíra.
After the time of Uddhyotana there are two distinct lines of pontiffs.
One, reverenced by the Kharatara gachha, is a succession of pontiffs
who all (with the exception of Abhayadeva who was a leper) bear the
title of.Jina. The other, accepted by the Tapa gachhas, bears various
titles, and was founded by Jagach Chandra, 44th in succession, accord.
ing to the Tapa gachha records, from Sudharman. These two historical
gachhas or sects of the Jains have apparently been logt sight of in the
maze of sects and orders into which the community has become divided
in more recent times.
The origin of the Digambara and Swetambara sects is very obscure.
According to one account the former sect was founded by Nataputta
Nirgrantha (or Nigantha), who has been identified with Mahábír
himself, Indeed it has been held that Mahábír only reformed an
ancient order of naked ascetics. According to the Kharatara records
the Digambaras arose in the time of the 18th pontiff, Chandra, whereas
the Tapa gach na account is that the name of the Nirgrantha sect was
changed to Kotika gachha as early as the time of the 9th pontif. It
thus seems likely that the Digambaras represent an older phase of
belief than even Jainism itself, but, bowever this may be, it is certain
that in the time of Bhadrabahu, the 27th in succession from Gotama,
the Digambaras and Swetambaras had finally separated. The Digam-
baras forthwith split up into various sects or rather orders under the
following pontiffst :-
Digambara Pontiffs.
Date of accession.
Bhadrabahu II
Sambat 4
Guptigupta
26
Maghanandin
36
Jinachandra
Kundakunda
The Digambara orders.
The successor of Guptigupta founded the great order of the Nandi
Sangha, sakha, or school, which from its importance appears to have
overshadowed the three minor orders founded by his other disciples
* These include the Khandewal, Agarwal, Srimal, Vanswál or Oswal.gots' or gachhas
according to Wilson, Religious Sects of the Hindus, p. 345.
+ Probably as re-incarnations of the Jinas or arhats. The Tapa gachhas by denying to
their pontiffs that title may signify their rejection of the doctrine that they re-incarnato
the arhats.
Ind. Ant. XX (1891), p. 341 and XX, p. 570,



346
Later Jain sects.
and which is, it would seem, often regarded as co-extensive with the
whole Digambara sect. These four orders were thus designated :-
Order.
Synonyms. Titles of Munis.
Founder.
Maghanandin : who
| Parijata* Gachha. Nandin, I Kirtti ..i observed the period of
I -- Nandi Sangha
Ź the rainy season under
Balatkara + Gana,
a nandi tree (cedrela
toona),
hana
(Pushkara Gachha.
II. -Sena Sangha / Surastha Gana.
((Vrishabha Sangha).
Raja, Bhadra
Vira, Sena
... ) Vrishabha:who observed
it under a Jinasena or
) sena tree.
.
( Chandra-Kapata Simba, Asrava ... ) Simha : who observed it
III.-Simha Sangha Gachha.
{ in the cave of a lion.
( Kanura Gana. Khumba, Sagara ...
Pushtka Gachha. Dewa, Naga ... ) Dewa: who observed it
IV.-Dewa Sangha 3
E in the house of the
(Desi Gana.
Datta, Langa ...) courtezau Devadatta.
The Digambaras insist strongly on the essential unity in matters of
doctrine and observance between all four orders, whose members alone
can consecrate images. Collectively these four orders appear to be
known as the Saraswati gachha, though perhaps that term is in strict-
ness only a synonym of the Nandi Sangha. So too they appear to
be called Kundakundanwaya, or the line of Kundakunda,' their fifth
pontiff. In some obscure way the three minor orders would seem to be
subordinate to the chief order, the Nandi Sangha, as they all four owe
allegiance, it appears, to the same pontiffs.
Later sects.
Subsequent to the rise of these four orders or sakhas, there arose
four other sanghas, vid., the Mula, Kashtha, Mathura and Goppa
Sangha. But Mula Sangha means literally 'the Original Communion,'
and the term is also used of the whole Jain community and of the
Digambaras before they spilt up into sects.
Still later there arose various panthis, such as the Visa-, Tera-,
Gumana, and Pota-Panthis, i.e. those who worship a book (pustaka)
in lieu of an image. And again it is said that, in Sambat 1709,
Lavaji of the Lompaka sect, ſ together with one Dharmadasa, a cotton-
priuter, founded the mouth-covering Dhundakas. These divided into
22 sections (presumably the Báís-tola), one of wbich was called
Dhanaji. Dhana's disciple was Budhara, and the latter's disciple
Raghunathji, whose disciple Bhishma founded the Terapanthis or
Mukhabandhas (mouth-coverers). Whether these sects are confined to
the Digambaras or not it is impossible to say.
But even these do not exhaust the list of sects. The Kharatara
gachha records enumerate ten gachhabhedas, the last of which was
founded as late as Sambat 1700, but whether these still exist or not is
not known. Indeed we do not know if they are sects or orders, or
* Parijata is the name of the celestial tree, and also of the coral treo (erythina indic ).
+ The powerful' order.
Strictly speaking then these titles are confined to the Nandi order.
Ś Indian Antiquary, 1892, p. 72.



Jain tenets.
347
merely theological schools. The Tapa gachhas also have various divi-
sions, such as the Vrihad- or Vada- (Vata-) gachha, so called because
Uddyotana consecrated Sarvedevasari, or according to some, 8 suris,
under a large fig-tree (vata).
The Jain tenets.
The Jain Jinas, Tirthankaras or Arhantas were 24 in number, each
having his separate chinha or cognizance and being distioguished by
the colour of his complexion. Images of one or more Arhantas figure in
every Jain temple. Thus Risahha-Nátha or Adinátha has as his cogniz-
ance the elephant, Sambhava has the horse, Sumati the curlew, and
Other Arhantas the lotus, the swastiků (doubtlese & sun-syubol), the
moon, a crocodile, the srivatsa (like a four-leaved shamrock in shape),
& rhinoceros, a buffalo, a tortoise, or a boar. Parasva-Nátha's cogni-
zance was the hooded snake, (shesha-phani), and that of Mahávíra, the
last of the Jinas, a lion. These two latter, with Risábha-Nátha, are
the most widely worshipped, and next to them cowe Santi (the antelope),
and Nemi (the blue water-lily). To what priweval cults these jinas
may point one can hardly conjecture.
It is easy to point to the resemblances between Buddhism and
Jainism. Apart from mere religious phraseology, which tends to be
the same in every religion, Buddha was often called Jína, 'the vic-
torious': his death was the nirvana: both Buddhists and Jains also
employ the swastika or satya as a sacred symbol : the Buddhists also
have or had a Digambara or order of naked ascetics. Further the
Juins indicate South Bihar as the scene of the life and labours of
nearly all their Tirthankaras, as it was of Buddha's, and Mahavíra is
said to have died at Pawa, to which place also Buddha's death is
assigned. The colossal statues of the Jains also resemble those of the
Buddhists.*
The Jain ritual is exceedingly complicated, but it has few features of
interest. Their places of pilgrimage are five in number, viz., Satrun-
jaya, Parasnath, in Bihar, Mount Abu, Girnar, and Chandragiri in the
Himalayas. The oldest Jain remains are probably at Girnar, a hill also
sacred to Buddhists and Hindus. Their holy seasons appear to be
peculiar to themselves, but the observarce of the rainy season as a
sacred period of the year is also characteristic of Buddhism.t.
It is not at all easy to say in what points the Jain doctrines diverge
from those of the Hindus, but apparently, the chief differences are that
the Jains repudiate the Vedas, and disa vow the authority of the
Brahmans. In other words, they represent an element of Hinduism
which never submitted to, or at an early period revolved frum, the
quasi-social supremacy of the Brahman caste, and in this they have
much in common with the Buddhists and Sikhs. They also resemble
the latter in having a line of spiritual teachers whom they reverence to
the more or less complete exclusion of the Biabmans.
* Indian Antiquary, 1873, pp 14, 13.1, 254, Ib. 1884, p. 191.
+ Indian Antiquary, X), 1882, p. 247, and IX, 1880, p. 100.



348
The Jains as a caste.
The Jain sútras,
The Jains hold that their religious books or sútras were 84 in number.
About 1,500 years ago the whole of India was visited by a famine which
lasted for full 12 years, and during that period 31 sútras were lost,
only 45 being preserved.
No Jain in Bahawalpur will reveal the name of a sútra because,
he says, he cannot accurately pronounce it, and mispronunciation of
its name would bring upon him the wrath of the gods. This, however,
is an excuse, and the truth is that an orthodox Jain is reluctant to tell
an outsider the names of his sacred books. The sútras are believed to
be written in Magdní Bháka (or Bhásha), the language presumably of
the Magadha empire. The Jains believe that Magdhí was spoken by
the god Indra.
It is also a tenet of the Jain faith that 8,400,000 (89 lakhs) jiws or
invisible and visible germs exist in the animal, vegetable, and mineral
kingdoms and in surg, narq, etc., according to the details given below:-
Number of jíus.
Where found.
Explanation.
n lúkhs
:::::
...
:
Prithwí ke ...
In the outer crust of the earth.
Ảp ke
In water.
Báo ko ... ...
In the air.
Teú ke.... ...
In fire.
Prílák Banáspatí
In underground vegetation, e. g., carrots,
turnips, onions, etc.
Sadhárau Banáspati In vegetations above the surface of the
ground, e. 9., shrubs, trees, etc.
Do Indríwále jíw ... Ini animals having a body and mouth.
Tín Indríale giao
In animals having a body and mouth and eyes.
Cho Indrí wale giao In animals having a body, mouth, nose and
eyes.
Devta
i.e. In the surg or paradise of the Jains.
Narg ke ... ..
In hell.
... Manukh ke
In one-legged and two-legged men.
Pazindri or Pashú ke ... In quadrupeds.
:1
...
:::
Perhaps the above tenets anticipate the modern science of bacteriology.
The Jain caste,
How far the Jains constitute a true caste it is not possible to say, for
the community appears to be organized on two distinct but concurrent
principles, one based on natural descent and so on caste, the other
sectarian, i.e., on the beliefs of the different sub-sects within the sect.
Hence arise cross-divisions which have yet to be elucidated. For ex-
ample, the Nandi Sangha* or order ig also called the Nandi Amnaya, but
amnaya means simply kula or family, so that Nandi Annaya means the
' generations of Nandi.' Gachha (with which gana is said to be synony-
mcus) is used indifferently for the religious sects or orders, and for the
natural groups within the caste, there being 84 gachhas or gots, i. e..
families or races, of the Jains. Whether these are in any wap con-
nected with the spiritual gachhas or not cannot be definitely stated.
* This was a matam or mat, (monastery), founded by the Lekhaka Lunka, in Sambat
1508, and from this mat the Veshadharas took their rise.



Jairámi-Jakhar.
849
It is curious, if Mr. Fagan's classification be correct, that the
Swetambara and Dhundia sects intermarry, at least in Baháwalpur
(where apparently the Digambara do not intermarry with the other
two sects). The Jain teaching strongly reprobates polygamy and in
consequence monogamy is practised by the Bhábras generally, b.g., in
Sialkot, while in Ferozepur they disallow polygamy under pain of
exclusion from the caste. On the other hand, Jainism has little effect
on social observances for at weddings in the latter District the Jain
Bánia (Aggarwal) bridegroom mounts a she donkey, after putting a
red cloth on her and feeding her with gram. He then mounts a mare,
according to the usual Hindu custom. The donkey-ride is a form of
Sítla worship.
JAIRÁMI, followers of one Jairám,' a sect whose founder was also known as
Bábá Kúrewála or Bhangewála, which would point to a low origin.
JAISAK, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
Jaiswárá, a Purbia caste. In the United Provinces a Jaiswará section is
found in many castes, such as the Chamár, Dhának, Kalál, Kurmí, Telí,
Dánia and Rájput. The name is supposed to be derived from the town
of Jais in Oudh. The Jaiswará of the Punjab cantonments is probably
a Chamár, and many of them are grooms or grass-cutters, though a
few take service as bearers.
JAJ, (1) a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery :
(2) a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JAJAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JÁJAK, the term for a Hindu nái in the Rawalpindi Division, and the Deraját,
according to Sir Denzil Ibbetson. But in Maltáni the word is said to
mean priest' and to be the same as JÁCHAK, and in Dera Ghazi Khán
the Jájik is a sewer of shrouds. The Jájik is certainly distinct from
the JHÁNGA.
JÁJI, a tribe now ranking as Pathan, and claiming descent from Khugiáni,
son of Kakai, but perhaps of Awán stock. The Durráni Afgháns,
however, admit that the Khugiáni are akin to them. The Jáji lié
west of the Turis on the western border of Kurram, holding the Iriáb
valley west of the Paiwar pass. One of their sections, the Uji Kbel.
holds Maidán, a large village in the valley of that name, and another
section is the Shúmu Khel. The Jájis are now at bitter feud with
the Turis.
JAJJAH (AND) JATHOL, a tribe of Játs, found in Siálkot. They claim Solar
Rajput origin and say that their ancestor, Jám, migrated from Multán.
His two sons Jáj and Jathol founded villages in the Pasrúr tahail of
Sialkot. Their mirásís are Posla, their Brahmans Badhar and their
náis Khokhar by got. According to the Customary Law of Sialkot
the Jajjah is distinct from the Jathaul.
JAJOHÁN, a Ját or Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JÁKHAR.- A tribe of Deswálí Játs, claiming Rájput (Chauhan or Udhí) descent.
Jákú, their eponym, migrated from Bíkáner to Jhajjar in Rohtak.
A Rájá of Dwárká had a bow which Jáku failed to bend, in spite of
uit raiwar pass. One of their sections tha 1: ***



350
Jakhar-Jálap.
the promised reward. In shame he left his native land and settled in
Bikáner. The legend clearly points to the loss of military status
by the Jákhars. Of the same stock are the Sángwán, Píru, and Kádián
Jáțs. The Jákhar are almost confined to Gurgaon and the adjoining
Jhajjar tahsil of Rohtak. They also own a large village in Hánsi.
JAKHAR, a Muhammadan Ját or Rájput clan (agricultural) found in
Montgomery, where they appear also as a clan of the Bhațţi Rajputs.
JAķHO, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JÁLABKE, a sept of Kharrals, which like the Piroke is of supposed Chuhrá
descent. Both are henco called Chuhrere. The legend goes that Sándal
- the famous Chuhrá dacoit who gave his name to the Sándal Bár,
demanded a Kharral bride as his fee for allowing them to graze in that
tract. But the. Kharrals blew up Sándal and his followers and took
the Chuhțá women as their booty.
JALÁÍR, ' a well-known Mughal tribe,' according to Raverty. Not apparently
represented among the modern Mughals in the Punjab.
JALÁLÁNI, a clan of the Bozdár Baloch.
Jalálí, one of the regular Moliammadan orders, founded by Sayyid Jalál.
ud-dín, a pupil of Baháwal Haqq, the Sohrwardi saint of Multán, and a
native of Bukhára whose shrine is at Uch in Baháwalpur. This teacher
was himself a strict follower of the Law, but his followers, who call
themselves Jalálís, are in many ways backsliders. They pay little
attention to prayer. A candidate for admission to the order shaves
completely his head, face, and body, burns his clothes and is branded
on his right shoulder.
JALAP, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur and in Jhelum. In the latter
District they were classed by Thomson with the Lillas and Phaphras as
a "semi-Ját tribe," while Brandreth referred to them as being, like the
Khokhars, a "quasi-Rájput tribe," who helped to oust the Jaujúas from
the Pind Dádan Khán plain. They are the predominant tribe in the
- Jálap ilágo," the rich well tract between the river and the hills east
of Pind Dádan Khán, and in position and influence are one of the principal
tribes of that tahsil, though their numbers are small and they actually
own little more than 25 square miles of land : this is their only seat in
Jhelum, and they are not known to hold land in any other district, except
to some small extent on the opposite side of the river.
They say that they were originally Khokhar Rájputs, who took the
name of their eponym, Jálap, who became a famous Pír, and was
buried ar Rámdiání in the Shahpur district, where they then dwelt, and
where they still go to do reverence at his tomb: they moved to their
present location in the time of Sidháran, who was several generations
in descent from Jálap. Another account states that in the time of the
emperor Shah Jahán they were established on the banks of the
Chénáb, when one of their chiefs was asked by Shah Jahán to give him
a daughter in marriage, as other Rájputs had done: the Jalap agreed,
but the brotherhood disapproved of his action, and when he came home
to fetch his daughter, set upon him and killed him. Sháh Jahán sent an
army to punish them, and being driven from their homes they crossed the



Jolapke- Jammun.
351
Jhelum, and after many fights with the Janjúas established themselves
where they are now found. A third version, given by the detractors of
the tribe, is that in the time of the Janjúa Rájás of Nandana, a fisher-
man was casting his pet in the river, wbich was then close under the
hills, and drew out a box containing a small boy : the child was taken
to the Rájá, who called him Jalap, because he was found in a pet (jál),
and made over to him as his inheritance the lands along the river:
according to this account the Jálaps are really Máchhís.
These fables throw little light on their real origin. Their neighbours
do not admit their claim to be considered Rájputs; and in social standing
they stand much below the tribes locally supposed to be of Rájput de
scent, though on the other hand they rank considerably above the Játs.
There is no striking difference between them and the surrounding tribes,
either in physique, appearance or manners : as agriculturists they are
fair: of martial spirit they have shown but little in recent times, and
very few of them are in the army, which may be as they say, because
they mostly have large holdings, and can well afford to live at home;
and it is certain that without fighting qualities they could not bave
established and maintained themselves in the most valuable tract in the
District, against the Janjúas and others: there is no bar to their enlistinent,
and there are some signs that they may in future betake themselves to
military service more freely tban in the past. Their customs are those
of the tract generally, but they maintain relations with Brahmans as
parohits : and various common Hindu customs are observed by them at
marriages. Their marriages are mostly inter se ; but they take girls
from the Khiwa, Kallas and Bharat, to whom they do not however give
their daughters : in marriages with the Janjúas and Khokhars, on the
contrary they give daughters but do not receive them. Widow remar-
riage is very rare amongst them.
JALAPKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery ; doubtless the
same as the Jalabke.
Ján a tribe of Játs, found in Jind. Kalu, their jatherá, has a math at
Laháwara in Patiala. They offer him 14 man of sweet cakes (purás )
at weddings, and these are taken by a Brahman.
JALLÁD, fr. the Arab, jild, skin’; a flogger or executioner. It was applied
to the Kanjars in Ambala wbo were employed as executioners at the
Delhi coart, and in the south-west Punjab is a common term for &
sweeper (see Chúhra). Cf. the derivation of KURTÁNA, 'whipper.'
JALOKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JALOZAI, a tribe of doubtful origin, affiliated to the Turi branch of the
Khattak Patháns.
JALWÁNI, a small Pathán tribe lying, with the Haripál, to the south of the
SHIRÁNI.
Jám, a Sindhi title, meaning chief or headman. When borne by the heada
men of a Punjab tribe it usually points to a Sindhi origin, i. e., to its
migration from Sindh or the valley of the Indus. In former times
Sindh denoted that river valley as far north as the modern Miánwálí.
JAMNUN. (1) a Rájput and (2) a Muhammadan Kamboh clan (both agricultural)
found in Montgomery Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.



352
Jamogi-Jamwal.
JAMOGí, an al of the Kanets which derives its name from Jamog, a village
in Dhámi, and is one of the chief tribes in that State. (See Bathmánu.)
JÁMRA, a Ját tribe, of notably fine physique, found in Dera Ghazi Kháp
district. Probably aboriginal or immigrants from the eastward.
JAMUN, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JAMWÁL, a Hindu Rájput clan (arricultural) found in Montgomery : and also
in Sialkot where two accounts of thrir origin are current. According
to their mirásis they are of Solar Rájput descent, and their ancestor
Agnigar migrated from Ajudbia to the Rechna Doáb. His son Jammu
defeated one Rája Chanda Rihás and founded the town of Jummu,
whence their name, Jamwal. One of the chiefs, however, by name
Milhan Minbás, took to agriculture and founded the Mangás tribe.
The other account is that Bharu Datt, migrating from Ajudhia to
Kashmír, returned and settled at the place where Maokot now stands.
His doscendant Jammu founded an independent state of that name,
and fourth in descent from hiin reigned Jográj, circa 474 Sambat.
From him descended the Deo dyvasty of Sialkot, whose pedigree is thus
given
KÁJÁ RÁm Deo, 11th in descent from Jográj.
Gefeated their nattook to a hard Datto
Sajji Deo.
Rai Jaggu.
Sarsár Deo.
Jaisingh Deo.
Narsingh Deo.
Jodb Deo.
Mal Deo,
Jhagar Deo.
The Minbás.
Pakhar Deo. .
Hamir Deo. Mának Deo, founder
of Mavkot.
The Mankoțias.
Raja Khokhar Deo.
Kapur Deo.
Jas Deo, founder
of Jasrota.
Sindba, founder of Sansa.
The Suniảl Piájputs.
Singrám Deo.
Dhruk Deo.
Raja Ranjit Deo. Balwant Deo. Mansa Deo. Surat Singh.
Brij Ráj Deo,
Kasár Singh
killed at Ruwal by
the Sikhs and the last
of the Deo dynasty. Rájá Guláh Singh; Rájá Dhián Rájá Suchet
founder of the ruling Singh.
Singh.
house of Jammu
and Kashmir.
In Hoshiárpur the Rájputs rank as a sept of the 1st grade:



Jan-Janjúa.
353
.
fonna
JAN, & wild and lawless tribe dwelling in the southern part of the Bári
Doab, and famous marauders: Panjabi Dicty., p. 475. Probably the
same as the Jún.
JANDÁNI, a olan of the Khosa Baloch.
JANDAPUR, see Gandapur.
JAŅDI, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JANDRAKT, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JÁNDRA, cotton-clad,' a term applied to the Hindus of the plairis as opposed
to those of the hills, e.g., the Gaddis, who wear wool. (Kángra).
JANDRAN, (1) an Aráin, (2) a Muhammadan Ját clan (both agricultural)
found in Montgomery, and (3) an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Janer, a tribe of Játs, found in Kapurthala, whither it migrated from the
east, beyond the Jumna.
JAŅGAL, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JANGálí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JÁNGLA, a Ját clan (agricultural) settled in Multán from Jhang in Mughal
times.
JÁNGLI, a generic name for the nomads of the Sándal Bár. The term is of
recent origin: see Bithárí.
Jání, a Ját clan (agriculturai) found in Amritsar.
JANIKHEL, see under Utmánzai.
Jáníl, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JANJÚA, a Rájput tribe found, though not in large numbers, throughout the
eastern Salt Range, their head-quarters, in the south-west Punjab
including Bahawalpur,* in Hoshiarpur and Amritsar. The Janjúa once
beld almost the whole of the Salt Range tract, but were gradually
dispossessed by the Gakkhars in the north and by the Awáns in the
west, and they now hold only the central and eastern parts of the Range
as tribal territory, which is exactly what they held au the time of
Bábar's invasion. They still occupy a social position in this tract
which is second only to that of the Gakkhars, and are always addressed
as Rájá. Various origips have been ascribed to the Janjúa.
According to Bábar the hill of Júd was held by two tribes of common
descent, the Júd and Janjúhah. The Janjúhah were old enemies of the
Gakkhars.t Babar records that a headman among them receives the
title of Rái (the same purely Hindu title was used by the Khokbars
and Gakkbars), while the younger brothers and sons of a Rai were
styled Malik.
According to a modern account Rájá Mal, Rathor, had sis sons :
Wiriál and Jodha, whose descendants intermarry, their settlements
being contiguous; while those of the other four, Khakla, Tarnoli,
Dabochar and Kálá, do not. Disputes between the brothers led to
their dispersion and disintegration, so that the septs regard themselves
as distinct tribes. Moreover many adopted various handicrafts, so that
* Where they are said to be a clan of the Gakkhars.
| E. H. I. IV, pp. 232, 231-5. Nearly all traces of the Júd, as a tribe, have disappeared,
but seo under Jodh.



354
Janjón gets and then the area of Jer
The Janjúa pedigrees.
Janjúa gots are now found among the Telis, Lchárs, Tarkháns and even
Musallis : and the Ghumman, Ganjiál, Bhakriál, Nathiál, Banth,
Basoya and other Játs are of Janjúa descent.
The four younger septs are each endogamous, and it is considered
discreditable to marry outside the sept. Widow remarriage is strictly
prohibited. Their observances are the same as those of the Chibhs,
The following pedigree conies from the mirisi of the tribe :-
RAJA MAL.
Raja Wir. Rajá Todh.
Achar. Sanpal.
Kirpál. Biláwal.
Cholar. Amli Khán.
Khakha. Tarnoli. Dabuchara. Pír Kála.
In Hazára,
Descendants Pesháwar and Descendants Descendants in
found in the ilaga of Pakhli numerous in ilága Kahro
Kashmit, ' in Hazro.. Hazára: some in Rátalpindi
also found in
Sialkot,
Kiás-ud- jín.
Daulat.
Descendants
at Dalwal
in Jhelum,
Taman.
Budha Kháu.
Aziz,
Sultán Saht.
Nur Ali.
Descendants in different
localities.
Sultán Bahata.
Sultán Álam. Sultán Sangu. Sultán Ali,
Sultán Khair Descendants in
Muhammad.
Jhelum.
At Badshahpur in
Jhelum
Sultán Tája.
Sultán Rája.
Descendants in
Makhyóla and villages Dasondi
Nana Khán. Chuhar.
Dear Jhelum.
Descendants in Khaul, Islám Kuli.
Tahsil Kháriál
Descendants at Rajur in
Khárián tahsil.
Another pedigree* makes them descendants of Jaipál who opposed
Mahmúd of Ghazni at Nandana 900 years ago. Bábar certainly de.
scribes them as rulers, from old times, of the Salt Range hills and of the
tract between Níláb and Bhera. He also describes Malik Hast, Janjúa,
as há kim of the ils and ulíses in the neighbourhood of the Sohán. . As
rulers. the Júd and Janjúha ruled according to fixed customs, pot
arbitrarily, realizing a sháh-rukhi (2}, rupees) yearly on every bead of
cattle and seven shah-rukhis on a marriage.t
* Jhelum Gazetteer, 1904, p. 93.
+ Shah Rukh was a son of Tímúr and succeeded to his father's empire in 1404-05, A. D.
The fact that his coins were in use among the Janjúa points either to their having been
tributary to him or to the inclusion of the Sait Range in his dominions. The latter con-
clusion is the more probable,



The Janjúas.
355
Mr. Thomson's account of the tribe in Jhelum, which follows, is not
contradicted on any material point by the present day Janjúas :
“At some uncertain period, then, some clans of Rahtor Rájputs, emigrating from Jodhpur,
Occupied the uplands of the Salt Range. The leader of this movement according to the
common account, was Rája Mal; but this chieftain is a little mythical, and any large action .
of doubtful origin is apt to be fathered upon him. The Rájputs first seated themselves at
Malot in the west Salt Range. This place, although picturesque, is so inaccessible and
unfruitful, that it must have been chosen for safety more than convenience. From here the
Rajputs extended their supremacy over the uplands of Jhangar and Kahun and the plain
country near Girjákh and Dárápur. In these regions they were rather settlers than con-
querors. They not only ruled, but to a great extent occupied also. It seens very doubtful
whether their real territories ever extended much further, but their traditions certainly
point to a former lordship over the western upland of Vánhat, and over much of the present
tahsils of Tallagang and Chakwal. If Bábar's account be read with attention, it will be
seen that he represents the Janjúas as confined to the hills, and ruling over various subject
tribes who cultivated the plains. This account serves to explain the utter extirpation that
has befallen the Janjúas in the Vunhár and elsewhere. If we conceive them as holding
detached forts in the midst of a foreign population which gradually grew hostile, then this
extirpation can easily be understood. This also serves, to explain how one or two villages
of peasant Janjúas have escaped, while all the Chiefs and Rájas round about have perished.
The vague accounts of the people seem to point to some such history as this, and not to any
great racial or tribal war.
The Janjúas were long the predominant race in the centre and west of the District. Rája
Mal is said to have reigned in the days of Mahmúd of Ghazní, and his authority was pro.
bably more or less recognised from Ráwalpindi to the Jhelum. When Mahmúd invaded
India the Janjúas opposed him, were defeated, and fled to the jungles. Mahmúd followed
them up, and succeeded in capturing Rája Mal himself. The Rája was released on condi.
tion, that he and his tribe should embrace Islám. When this conversion took place, the
janju or caste-thread was broken, and the neophytes have been called Janjúas ever since.*
Rája Mal is said to have left live sons. Three of these settled in Ráwalpindi or Hazára,
Two, Wir and Jodh, remained in Jhelum. They speedily divided their possessions. Wir took
the west, and Jodh the eastern share. Choya Saidan Sháh was the boundary between thein.
Wir's descendants are now represented by the Janjúas of Malot and the Kahún ilága.
Their cbief seat is at Dilwál. Jodh's descendants have split into many branches. A general
supremacy was long exercised by the Sultáns of Makhiála inJhangar. But the chiefs of
Kusak and Bághánwála soon becamo practically independent, as did also those of Vilúr,
Karangli, and Girjákh, whose descendants are now either extinct or much decayed. The
plain ilága of Dárápur and Chakri seems to have broken off from the main stock even carlier
than the others. This passion for separatism is fatal to any large authority. The feuds to
which it gave rise, joined with an endless Gakkhar war, and the establishment of new and
strenuous races beyond the mountains brought the lanjúa dominion to destruction. The
Dhani country, called Malúki Dhan after the great Rája, and the forts in Tallagaog and the
Vunhár seem to have been all lost not long after the time of Bábar. But in the centre and
east Salt Range and round Dárápur the Janjúa supremacy remained undisputed until the
advent of the Sikhs. And the rich Salt Mines at Khewra and Makrách must have always
made this territory important. The Sikhs conquered the whole country piecemeal. Ranjit
Singh himself besieged and captured Makhiála and Kusak. Most of the influential chiefs
received jágírs but were ousted from their old properties.
The Jaujúas are physically a well-looking race. Their hards and feet in particular are
often much smaller and more finely shaped than those of their neighbours, They largely
engage in military service, where they prefer the cavalry to the infantry. They are poor
farmers, and bad men of business. They are careless of details, and apt to be passionate
wben opposed. Too often they fix their hopes on impossible objects. As landlords they
are not exacting with submissive tenants. They are willing to sacrifice something to retain
even the poor parodies of feudal respect which time has not destroyed. Their manners are
* The Janjúas themselves now rejcct this story, which is not in itself very plausible: they
say the name f the tribe is derived from that of one of their forefathers, Janjúha, who in
most of the genealogies comes eight or nine generations before Raja Mal. It is moreover
iinprobable that the general conversion of the Janiúas took place 900 years ago; it is likely
enough that Mahmúd made converts, and that these revertéd as soon as his back was turned:
but the Janjúa villa ge pedigree tables nearly all agree in introducing Muhammadan names
only about 15 gener ations back, which would point to their general conversion about the
niiddle of the 15th century, Cracroft however noted that the Janjúas in Ráwalpindi stili
continued to feast Brahmans, etc., at weddings.



356
Janjuhan-Jaría.
often good. They have a large share of vanity which is generally rather amusing tban
offensive. They are at the same time self-respecting, and not without a certain kind of
pride, and are eminently a people with whom slight interludes of emotional government are
likely to be useful."
In Hoshiarpur the Janjuás are fairly numerous to the north-east of
Dasúya.* The Biháls of Badla are said to be an al or sub-division of
the Janjúa which takes its name from the village of Beata in tappa
Kamáhi. Bah means a settlement, and the Japjúa villages seem
often to begin with Bah. The Janjúas in this District say they migrated
from Hastinapura to Garh Makhiala in Ráwalpindi or Jhelum, and
thence, to escape Muhammadan oppression to Badla under Rájá
Sahj Pál, 8th in descent from Rája Jodh. His son Pahár Singh
held 132 villages round Badla. They claim to be Ránás of the Dogars,
and the head of the family is installed † with the common ceremony of the
tika under a banian tree at Barnár or Bah Ata, though Badla (Bar- or
Bobarwala) also claims the honour, amidst the assembled Dogars of Mehr
Bhatoli, a village near Badla, who present a horse and shawl, while the
Bibáls pay a nazar of Re, 1 or Rs. 2 each. They are said to oply give
daughters to Dadwals, who are 1st grade Rájputs, and to take them from
Barangwáls, Laddús, and Ghorewáhás, who are in the 3rd grade.
The Badliál is another Janjúa sept, deriving its name from Badla,
the ancient Rájput tíka. Badla is now in ruins and its ráná's family
is extinct, but the sept has made one of its members their ráná and
presents nazarána, etc., to him as usual. Still, as he has not been
installed or made a tilakdhári, his ránáship does not count for much.
JANJUHAN, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JANJUNHA, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JANOHA (doubtless Janjúa). -A Rájput sept, an offshoot of the Bhattis
whose ancestor Johad (? Judh) came to Garh Makhila in Aktar's reign
and founded Núrpur Janoha in Kapurthala.
JANSAN, a Muhammadan Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JANWAS, a Muhammadan Jáy clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
JÁŘ, a Gujar. clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Járá, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur,
JARÁH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JARÍA, a sept of Játs found in Jínd. In that state five gots of Játs derite
their names from as many parts of the beri tree, vize :-
(0) Rangi, from the rang, or bark of the beri tree used for dyeing,
(ii) Jaria, from jar, the root, (iv) Jbari, or seedlings, and
(ii) Beria, from ber; the fruit, (v) Khichar, or bud.
These five gots may however intermarry and are, collectively, called
Jaria, which is also said to be derived from jorá and to mean'twin.'
-
* The Pahri of Kuhi is a branch of the Japjúas which has taken to karewa and so lost
status so that Janjúas and clans of equal or higher grade do not intermarry with them.
of the formalities at the accession of a new Sultan of Makhiala are somewhat similar :
79, 11 or 13 days after his predecessor's death the principal men of the tract are feasted ;
in the afternoon they assemble at a rock behind the Sultan's house and the family
Brahman puts the tikd on his forehead. The Bultán then appoints a wazir and four divans.



357
Jariál-Ját.
JARIÁL, a clan of Hindu Rájputs found in Hoshiarpur, in greatest numbers in
the north-east of Dasúya tahsil. Also a clan of agricultural Brahmans
in the Rajgiri taluka of famírpur tabsil in Kángra. They rank in the
2nd grade in both castes.
JAROLA, (1) an agricultural clan found in Shahpur, (2) a Ját clan (agricultural)
found in Multán.
Jarrás, a surgeon and dentist who is almost always a nái..
JARSODI, Balochi : a washerman, fr. jar clothes, shodhagh to wash,
Jarwár, a clan of the Khosa Baloch.
JASGAM, a clan of Muhammadan Rajputs, found in the Murree hills. Like
the Dhúnds and Khatríls they claim descent from Manáf, an ancestor of
the Prophet, and got possession of the tract they now occupy under
Gakkhar rule, when one Zuhair, a descendant of the Prophet, came from
Arabia and settled near Kahúta.
Jasíál, a clan of Hindu Rájputs, of Salámia status, found in Hoshiárpur.
JASPÁL, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Jasná, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
JABROTIA, a Rájput clan, an offshoot of the JAMWÁL. It derives its name
from Jasrota and is of Jaikaria status.
Jaswárá, see Jaiswárá.
JASTAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Jaswál, an offshoot of the Katoch, the great Rajput clan which gave ruler's
to the kingdom of Trigarta. It derives its name from (or possibly gives
its name to the Jaswán Dún of Hoshiarpur, and at its original seat, Bhir
Jaswán, are remains of buildings, wells and fountains which attest its
former power. It still ranks bigh, being of Jaikaria status. In 1596 the
Jasuwalas were described as 'Zamíndárs with an army' and gave some
trouble to the imperial authorities.*
Jár. fem. Játní, dim. Jateta, fem, -í, the child of a Ját. The form
Ját is used in the South-East Punjab. In the Central Punjab Jatt
fem. Jattí, is usual. Another dim. Jațúngará, a Jatt's child, is used
contemptuously. In the south-west of the Province the Multáni and
Balochi term for a Ját is Jagdál, and Jat (with the soft t) is used
to denote a camel-driver, as in Upper Sindh, where jat now means
a rearer of camels or a shepherd, in opposition to a husbåndman.
The Játs in History.
fragmentary notices of the Játs occur in the Muhammadan historians
of India, as will be seen from the followivg excerpts from Elliot's
History of India.
Ibn Khurdádba, writing ante 912 A, D., gives the distance from
the frontier of Kirmán to Mansúra as 80 parasangs, and adds :-
« This route passes through the country of the Zats (Jats) who keep
watch over it.” E. H. I., I, p. 14,
* Elliot's Hist. of India, VI, p. 129.



368
The Játs in history.
According to the author of the Mujmal-ut-Tawáríkh* tbe Jatst and
Neds were reputed descendants of Ham. They both dwelt in Sindi
and on (the banks of) the Bahar river, and the Jats were subject to
the Meds whose oppression drove them across the Pahan river. The
Jats were, however, accustomed to the use of boats and were thus able
to cross the river and raid the Meds, wbo were owners of sheep.
Eventually the Jats reduced the Med power and ravaged their country.
A Jat chief, however, induced both tribes to lay aside their differences
and send a deputation of chiefs to wait on King Dajúshan (Dur.
yodhana), son of Dahrát (Dhritaráshtra), and beg him to nomin.
ate a king, whom both tribes would obey. Accordingly the emperor
Dajúsban appointed Dassál (Duhsalá), bis sister, and wife of the
powerful king Jandrát (Jayadratha), to rule over the Jats and Meds. As
the country possessed no Brahmans, she wrote to her brother for
aid, and he sent her 30,000 from Hindustan. Her capital was Askaland.
A small portion of the country she made over to the Jats under their
chief, Júdrat.
Chach, the Brahman usurperll of Sind, humiliated the Jats and
Lohánas. He compelled them to agree to carry only sham swords:
to wear no under-garments of shawl, velvet or silk, and only silken
outer.garments, provided they were red or black in colour: to put no
saddles on their horses : to keep their heads and feet uncovered.: to
take their dogs with them when they went out: to furnish guides and
spies and carry firewood for the royal kitchen. Of the Lohána, i.e.
Lákha and Samma, who were apparently Jats, it is said that the same
rules were applied to them and that they knew no distinction of great
and small.** Muhammad bin Qasim maintained these regulations,
declaring that the Jats resembled the savages of Persia and the moun.
taids. He also fixed their tribute.tt
The Bhetí Thákurs and Jats of Ghazul, who had subunitted and etl.
tered the Arab service, garrisoved Ságara and the island of Bait, 11 in
the time of Muhamınad bin Qasim, c. 712 A. D.
The Jats, like tbe Baloch, the Saluuias and the Sodhas, revolted
against Umar, $$ but they were soon reduced to submission, ante 1300
A. D.
In 834 A. D., and again in 835 Ajit bin Isa, was sent against the
Jats, whose chief was Muhammad bin 'Usmán' || and commander Samlu.
Ajif defeated them in a seven months' campaign, and took 27,000 of
them, including women and children with 12,000 fighting men to
their tribute the savammaintainedistin
river.
* Written circa 1126 A. D.
+By the Arabs,' the writer interpolates, 'the Hindu, are called Jais.'
I Sind = the valley of the Indus from the modern Miánváli down to the mouths of the
S E. H. I., I, pp. 108-5.
û His usurpation dates from 631, A: D:
E. H. I., I, p. 151.
** Ib: p. 187.
+f Ib. p. 188.
II E. H. I., I, p. 167. This can hardly be tho modern Grazni. It can only be the Gari
Ghazni or Ghajri of modern Ját legend, as it lay apparently on the Indus.
88 Or Unnar : E. H, I., 1, pp. 220.1.
di E, H, I., II, p. 247,



The Játs in history.
359
Baghdad, whence they were transported to the northern frontier and
soon perished, exterminated in a Byzantine raid. The seats. of these
Jats lay on the roads of Hajar, which they had seized,
Amrán, the Barmecide governor of the Indian frontier, marched to
Kíkán* against the Jats whom he defeated and subjugated. There he
founded Al-Baiza, the white city', which he garrisoned, and thence
proceeded to Multán and Kandábíl. The latter city stood on a hill and
was held by Muhammad, son of Khalil, whom Amrán slew. He then
made war on the Meds, but summoned the Jats fo Alrúr, where he
sealed their hands, took from them the jizya or poll-tax and ordered
that every man of them should bring with him a dog when he waited on
him. He then again attacked the Meds, having with him the chief
men of the Jats.t Amrán was appointed in 836 A. D. to be governor
of Sindh.
The Tuhfat-ul-Kirán appears to assign to the Jats and Biloches
the same descent, from Muhammad, son of Hárún, governor of Makrán,
who was himself descended from the Amír Hamza, an Arab, by a
fairy. I
The Játs of Júd, which we must take to mean the Salt Range,
were, according to the later Muhammadan historians, the object of
Mahmúd's 17th and last expedition into India in 1026 A. Ď. It
is however hardly possible that Mahmúd conducted a naval campaign
in or near the Salt Range, and the expedition probably never took
place. It is moreover exceedingly doubtful whether the Salt Range
was then occupied by Jats at all. S
Jats, under Tilak, hunted down Ahmad, the rebel governor of
Multán, in 1034 a. D., until he perished on the Mihrán of Sind. For
this they received 100,000 dirhams as a reward. The Jats were still
Hindus.
After the defeat of Rai Pithaura in 1192, and the capture of
Delhi by Mohammad of Ghor, Jatwán raised the standard of national
resistance to Muhammadan aggression at Hánsi, but was defeated
on the borders of the Bagar by Qutb-ud-dín Ibak who then took
Hánsi. It is apparently not certain that Jatwán was a Jat leader.
Firishta says Jatwan was a dependent of the Rái of Nahrwálá in
Guzerat. I.
In November 1398 Timúr marched through the jungle from Ahrúdí.
in Karnál to Tohána, through a tract which he found inhabited by
Jats, Musulmáns only in name, and without equals in theft and high-
way robbery: they plundered caravans on the road and were a
terror to Musulináns and travellers. On Timúr's approach the Jats
had abandoned the villago (Tohána) and fled to their sugarcane
fields, valleys, and jungles, but Timúr pursued them, apparently after
* Or Kaikán,' which was in the occupation of the Jats '; E. H. I., I, p. 449.
+ E. H. I., I, p. 128 : cf. App. pp. 449-50
İ E. H. I., I, p. 336.
$ E. H. I., II, p. 477.
i E. II. I., II, p. 133.
Ô T. N., pp. 516-7.



360
bånd Bhoran." and adja milar tribes
The Játs in history.
A contest in which the Jats had held their own, and put 2,000 of the
demon-like Jats to the sword.*
About 1530 the Sultan Muhammad ibn Tughliq had to suppress the
Bíráhas, Mandahárs, Jats, Bhat(ti)s, and Machís (Minas), who had
formed mandals round Sunám and Sámána, withheld tribute and
plundered the roads.t
"In the country between Níláb and Bhera," wrote Bábar, " but
distinct from the tribes of Júd and Janjúhah, and adjacent to the
Kashmír hills are the Jats, Gújars, and many others of similar tribes,
who build villages, and settle on every hillock and in every valley.
Their hakim was of the Gakkhaſ race, and their government resembled
that of the Júd and Janjúhah.''I
“Every time," adds Bábar, “that I have entered Hindustán, the Jats
and Gújars have regularly poured down in prodigious numbers from
their bills and wilds, in order to carry off oxen and buffaloes." They
had committed great depredations, and their districts now yielded
little revenue. After the rest of the country bad been subdued these
tribes began their old practices again, and plundered the Turki
garrison on its way from Sialkot to Bábar's camp. Bábar had two
or three of the offenders cut in pieces. Like the Bhukiál and other
tribes the Jats were dependents of the Gakkhars.Il Fath Khan, Jat of
Kot Kapura devastated the whole Lakhi Jangal and kept the high
roads from Lahore to Delhi in a ferment in Sher Shah's time.
The Tárákh-z-Táhiri describes the tribes of the Baloch and Nahmrúi
(? Brahúí), of the Jokiya** and Jat, as settled on the hills adjoining
the Lakki mountain, which extend to Kích and Makrán,tt in the time
of Akbar. The Muntakhab-ul-Lubáb describes the Sikhs as principally
Játs and Khatris.fi
The Játs of the south-east Punjab formed politically a part of the
Bhartpur principality during the decay of the Mughal empire of
Delhi. Occasionally a single village would plunder an imperial
baggage-train, $$ but the tribes, as a whole, looked to Bhartpur as
their capital. The Nawab Safdar Jang employed Suraj Mal, and he
obtained the whole of the Mewát, up to the neighbourhood of Delhi,
besides the province of Agra.
Lim's camp.cored the these
sofa.cos.
1
* E, H, L. III, pp. 428.9, 492-3.
+ E. H. I., III, p. 245.
H. I., IV, p. 234.
$ E. H. I., IV, p. 240.
ů E. H. I., v, p. 278.
It is very doubtful if Kapúra is right. The Tarikh-i-Sher.Sháhi has " Fath Khán Jat,
had been in rebellion in Kayúla, and in the vime of the Mughals had plundered the whole
country as far as Pánípat. E. H. I., IV, p. 398,
** Possibly a misprint for Johiya,
tt Ib p. 286.
ŠIE. I, I., VII, pp. 413, 425.
5 As when the Játs of Mitrol, between Kodal and Palwal, plundered the Amir.ni.
Umará's baggage in 1738-the 19th year of Muhammad Shah. The Ját plunderers were
popularly called the Rám-dal, a name which appears to connote the semi-religious
character of the revolt against the Muhammadan domination: E, H, I., VIII. DO. 55 and
187.



361
The Játs.
The Játs of Bhartpur.
Bajja Singh of Sansani, between Díg and Kambher.
Churánhán.
BADAN SINGH, founder of Bhartpur,
died 1780-1 A. D.
Rája Rám.
Mohkam Singh.
SURAJ MAL.
JAWAHIR SINGH, RATAN SINGH,
NAWAL SINGH. Bhawáni Singh.
dier! 1768.
Kheri Singh alias Ranjit SINGH
? son of Suraj Mal,
died 1806.
The following account of the Játs in the Punjab is largely a re.
production of the late Sir Denzil Ibbetson's account of them in the
Punjab Census Report, 1883,* He prefaced his account by observing
that the line separating Játs, Rájputs and certain other castes (tribes)
is almost impossible of definition. More especially is this true of
the whole of the Western Punjab, where the term for one of 'gentle'
birth is sáhu, especially in the Salt Range, and where the land owning
and cultivating classes are organised on a tribal basis, 30 that stress is
always laid on a man's tribe or clan and not on his status or caste.' As
we go further east the people begin to use the caste terms, Rájput and
Ját, more freely, but in the vaguest possible way, so that a Muhainmadan
Ját tribe in Gujranwála or Gujrát will appear now as Rajput and a
decade later as Ját, or vice verscê, or half the tribe will return itself
as Rájput and the other half as Ját, as caprice dictates. Alung the
Jammu border, and beyond it into Gurdásnur, the Rájputs and Játs
are well definad, the former being confined to the hills, the latter to
the plains, as Sir Louis Dane has pointed out, I so rigidly that one is
almost tempted to suspect that there is something in the physical
nature of the plains which militates against the formation of an
aristocracy. Within the hills the RÁJPUTS have their own social
vradations. In the plains the Játs also are tending to develope social
distinctions which will be noticed later on. In the Central Punjab
the Ját is fairly well defined as a caste, though he is not absolutely
endogamous, as inarriages with women of inferior Chates may be
deprecated but are not invalid. Even in the eastern districts such
marriages are toleratod, but in the true Ját country which centres
round Rohtak they are probably much rarer than in Karnál, Ambala
or the central districts. Broadly speaking, the Ját is a Musulmán
in the Western Districts, a Sikh in the Centre, and a Hindu in the
South-East, but there are many exceptions to this rule. In the
Sikh Districts it is a brother's duty, as well as his privilege, to espouse
* Poprinted as Punjab Ethnology.
t Játs and Rájputs, as observed by Sir Denzil Ibbetson, together constitute about three,
tenths of the total population of the Punjab, and include the great mass of the dominant
laud-owning tribos in the cis.Iodus portion of the Proviace. Their political is even greater
than their numerical imajuatanco ; while boy afford to the ethnologist infinite matter for
inquiry and consideration. Their customs are in the maiu Hindu, though in the Western
Plains and the Salt Rauge Tract the restrictious upon intermarriage have, in many cases,
come to be based upon considerations of social standing only. But even here the marriage
ceremony and other social customs retain tho clear impress of Indian origin.
Gurdáspur



362
Ját origins.
bis deceased brother's wife. In the south-east the practice of widow
remarriage differentiates the Hindu Ját from the Rájput, but it is
not universal even anong the Játs, for in Gurgaon some Ját families
disallow it and others which allow it do not permit it with the
husband's relations.* In other words, as we go eastwards orthodox
Brahminical ideas come into play.
The origins of the Ját.
Perhaps no question connected with the ethnology of the Punjab
peoples has been so much discussed as the origin of the so-called Ját
‘race. It is not intended here to reproduce any of the arguments adduced.
They will be found in detail in the Archæological Survey Reports, II,
pp. 51 to 01; in Tod's Rajasthan, I, pp. 52 to 75 and 96 to 101 (Madras
Reprint, 1880) ; in Elpliinstone's History of India, pp. 250 to 253; and
in Elliot's Races of the N.-W. P., I, pp. 130 to 137, Suffice it to say that
hoth Sir Alexander Cunningham and Colonel Tod agreed in considering
the Játs to be of Indo-Scythian stock. The former identified them with
the Zanthi of Strabo and the Jatii of Pliny and Ptolemy; and beld that
they probably entered the Punjab from their home on the Oxus very
shortly after the Meds or Mands, who also were Indo-Scythians, and
who moved into the Punjab about a century before Christ. The Játs
seem to have first occupied the Indus valley as far down as Sindh,
whither the Meds followed them about the beginning of the present
era. But before tbe earliest Muhammadan invasion the Jăţs had
spread into the Punjab Proper, where they were firmly established in
the beginnirg of the 11th century. By the time of Babar the Játs
of the Salt Range had been subdued by the Gakkhars, Awáns, and
Janjúas, while as early as the 7th century the Játs and Meds of
Sindh were ruled by a Brahman dynasty. Tod classed the Játs as one
of the great Rajput tribes, and extended bis identification with the
Getze to both races; but here Cunningham differed from him, holding
the Rájputs to belong to the original Aryan stook, and the Játs to a
late. wave of immigrants from the north-west, probably of Scythian
race
It may be continued Sir Denzil Ibbetson, 'tbat the original Rajput
and the original Ját entered India at different periods in its history,
though to my mind the term Rajput is an occupational rather than
an ethnological expression. But if they do originally represent two
separate waves of immigration, it is at least exceedingly probable,
both from their almost ideņtical physique and facial character and
from the close communion which has always existed between them,
that they belong to one and the same ethnic stock; while, whetber
this be so or not, it is almost certain that they have been for many
centuries and still are so intermingled and so blended into one people,
that it is practically impossible to distinguish them as separate wholes.
It is indeed more than probable that the process of fusion has not
ended here, and that the people who thus in the main resulted from
the blending of the Ját and the Rájput, if these two ever were distioct,
is by no means free from foreign elements. We have seen how the
Pathán people bave assimilated Sayyids, Turks and Moghals, and how
* Po. Customary Law, II, (Gurgaon), p. 132.



Ját origins.
363
it was sufficient for a Ját tribe to retain its political independence and
organisation in order to be admitted into the Baloch nation; we know
how a character for sanctity and social exclusiveness combined will
in a few generations make a Quresh or a Sayyid; and it is almost certain
that the joint Ját-Rájput stock contains not a few tribes of aboriginal
descent, though it is probably in the main Aryo-Scythian, if Scythian
be not Aryan. The Man, Her, and Bhullar Játs are known as asli or
original Játs because they claim no Rájput ancestry, but are supposed
to be descended from the hair (jat) of the aboriginal god Siva;
the Játs of the south-eastern districts divide themselves into two
sections, Shivgotri or of the family of Siva,* and Kásabgotri who
claim connection with the Rájputs; and the names of the ancestor Bar
of the Shivgotris and of his son Barbara, are the very words which
the ancient Brahmans give us as the marks of the Barbarian aborigines.
Many of the Ját tribes of the Punjab have customs which apparently
point to non-Aryan origin, and a rich and almost virgin field for
investigation is here open to the ethnologist.
In other words, the Shivgotri Játs of the south-east like the Mán,
Her and Bhullar, are unassuming tribes which do not lay claim
to descent from a once dominant or ruling clan, whereas nearly all
the other Ját clans arrogate to themselves Rajput ancestry, meaning
thereby that once upon a time they, or some representatives of the
clan, were sovereign or semi-independent chieftains acknowledging
po rájá but their own head.
-
* We may regard Shiva here as the earth.god and the Shivgotri as autochthones. In
Hissár, where they are few in numbers, they say that their foreinther was created from the
matted hair of Shiva, who consequently was named Jat Budhra. Regarding their origin
there is no historical account. But tradition tells that one of the clan, named Barh, becanie
master of a large portion of Bíkáner ; where, at first he created a village which he called
after his name; and thereafter went and resided at Jhansal, where his descendants live to
this day, and which iláqa belongs to them. He had 12 sons :- Punim, Dhania, Chachrik,
Buli, Burbúra, Sulukhun, Chirin, Chandia, Khók, Dunáj, Liter, and Kakkar. From these
sprang 12 sub-divisions. (Khok is also a Gil muhin. Punia was ancestor of the Punnú).
The descendants of the first were most in number, and had the largest possessions. They
owned the country round Jhansal which was called the Punia iláqa and which is mentioned
in the Aín.i. Akbari. Marriages among members of this clan cannot, according to their
custom, be formed amongst themselves ; i. e., they must intermarry with the Kásabgotris.
The latter are in reality degenerate Rajputs, and call themselves Kásabgotris after Kásab,
son of Brahma.
+ Mr. H, Davidson in the following passage clearly went too far:-
" It is not generally known that the Ját race is entirely of Rajput, origin. A Rájput
marrying the widow of a deceased brother loses caste as a Rájput; the ancestors of all
the Ját families were thus Rajputs, who had taken to wife the widows of their deceased
brethren, who had died without male heirs. The Phúlkíán family, if questioned as to
their Rájput descent, being now to all intents and purposes Játs, would state this to have
been the manner of the transition. I myself have the fact from one of the most intelligent
members of the family. The headmen of more than one Ját village of different gots, or
clans, have likewise given me the same information, and I am convinced of its general
truth. The sub-division of (or) gots among the Játs is endless, and I have been at some
pains to trace the circumstance, which constitutes the origin of each got. The result is
entirely confirmatory of the above account of the general origin of the race. The Rajput
ancestor, who ceased to be a Rájput, furnishes the name of the got, not usually directly
from his own name, but from some surname he had acquired, as the 'toothless ''the fair'
or from circumstance attending his family, or the birth of his sons A very powerful got
is styled 'the hay.stack' from the fact of his wife having been suddenly confined near
one; in some cases the name of the village he or his sons founded gave the name of the
got which derives its ancestry from him. One got never intermarries within itself, one
got marrying with another got. Much bas been written on the peculiar nicaning of the



364
Rájputs and Játs.
Are the Játs and Rájputs distinct ?
* But' continued Sir Denzil, whether Játs and Rájputs were or were
not originally distinct, and whatever aboriginal elements may have
been affiliated to their society, I think that the two now form a
common stock, the distinction hetween Ját and Rajput being social
rather than ethnic. I believe that those families of that common stock
whom the tide of fortune has raised to political importance have
become Rájputs almost by mere virtue of their rise : and that their
descendants have retained the title and its privileges on the condition,
strictly enforced, of observing the rules by which the higher are
distinguished from the lower castes in the Hindu scale of precedence;
of preserving their purity of blood by refusing to marry with families
of inferior social rank, of rigidly abstaining from widow marriage,
and of refraining from degrading occupations. Those who transgressed
these rules have fallen from their high position and ceased to be
Rajputs; while such families as, attaining a dominant position in their
territory, began to affect social exclusiveness and to observe the rules
have become not only Rájás, but also Rájputs or “sons of Rájás."
For the last seven centuries the process of elevation at least has
been almost at a standstill. Under the Delhi emperors king-making
was practically impossible. Under the Sikbs the Rajput was over.
shadowed by the Ját, who resented his assumption of superiority and
his refusal to join him on equal terms in the ranks of the Khalsa,
deliberately persecuted him wherever and whenever he had the power,
and preferred his title of Ját Sikh to that of the proudest Rajput.
On the frontier the dominance of Pațbáns and Baloches and the
general prevalence of Muhammadan feelings and ideas placed recent
Indian origin at a discount, and led the leading families who belonged
to neither of these two races to claim connection, not with the
Kshatriyas of the Sanskrit. classes, but with the Mughal conquerors
of India or the Qureshi cousins of the Prophet; insomuch that even
admittedly Rajput tribes of famous ancestry, such as the Khokhar
have begun to follow the example. But in the hills. where Rajput
dynasties with genealogies perhaps more ancient and unbroken than can
be shown by any other royal families in the world retained their
independence till yesterday, and where many of them still enjoy es
great social authority as ever, the twin processes of degradation from
and elevation to Rájput rank are still to be seen in operation. The
Rájá is there the fountain not only of honour but also of caste, which
is the same thing in India.' And Sir James Lyall wrote :-
“Till lately the limits of castes do not seem to have been so immutably fixed in the hills
is in the plains. The Rájá was the fountain of honour, and could do much as he likod.
I have heard old mon quote instances within their memory in which a Rájá promoted a
his as the real the had the keje
families many of our dogradation. The
word zamindár, in different parts of India. Here the use of the word is very peculiar .
Those, generally, who derive their livelihood directly from the soil, are not called samindars
but kasáng. On approaching a village, and asking what people live in it, if any other TACA
but Játs live in it. the name of the race will be given in reply. But if the population are
Játs, the reply will be "zamindárs live there ' - zainindár log baste; in fact the word
zamindár is here only applied to the Játs." This last remark, Sir Donald McLeod noted,
applied equally almost throughout the Puojab, even where the Játs have been coavorted
to Islám. Ludhiana Sett. Rep., 1859, pp. 28.29. The 'hay.stack' got is said to be the
Garewal,



Jáțs as degraded Rájputs.
365
Ghirth to be a Ráthi, and a Thákur to be a Rájput, for service done or money given; and
at the present day the power of admitting back into caste fellowship persons put under a
ban for some grave act of defilement, is a source of income to the jágirdár Rájas. I believe
that Mr. Campbell, afterwards Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, has asserted that there is no
such thing as a distinct Rájput stock; that in former times before caste distinctions ha!
become crystallized, any tribe or family whose ancestor or head rose to royal rank became
in time Rájput. This is certainly the conclusion to which many facts point with regard to
the Rajput families of this district, viz., Kotlenr and Bangáhal, are said to be Brahmans
by original stock. Mr. Barnes says that in Kángra the son of a Rájput by a low-caste
woman takes place as a Ráthi : in Saraj and other places in the interior of the hills I have
mot families calling themselves Rajputs, and growing into general acceptance as Rájputs, in
their own country at least, whose only claim to the title was that their grandfather was
the offspring of a Kanetni by a foreign Brahmiin. On the border line in the Himalayas,
between Tibet and India proper, any one can observe caste growing before his eyes; the
ncble is changing into a Řájput, the priest into a Brahman, the peasant into a Ját, and so
on down to the bottom of the scale. The same process was, I believe, more or less in force
in Kangra Proper down to a period not very remote from to-day."
eneral tradition married to the Gurgaon anu
A very similar process has been going on among the Játs. The
Golia Játs were certainly by origin Brahmans and the Langriál were
Chárans. And in the plains countless traditions say that the son of
a Rájput by a Ját, Gujar, Ror or other wife of low degree became
Játs. But in the plains, as in the hills, a Rájput can lose his status
and sink in the social scale by allowing the practise of karewa, and
rumerous Ját traditions point to the adoption of that costom as
having dograded a blue-blooded Rájput family to Ját or yeoman
status. As Sir Denzil Ibbetson wrote:
The reverse process of degradation from Rájput to lower rank is too
common to require proof of its existence, which will be found if needed
together with further instances of elevation, in the section which treats
of the Rájputs and kindred castes. In the eastern districts, where
Biahmanism is stronger than in any other part of the Punjab, and
Delhi too near to allow of families rising to political independence, it
is probable that no elevation to the rank of Rajput has taken place
within recent times. But many Rájput families have ceased to be
Rajpute. Setting aside the general tradition of the Punjab Játs to the
effect that their ancestors were Rájputs who married Játs or began to
practise widow-marriage, we have the Gaurwa Rájputs of Gurgaon and
Delhi, who have indeed retained the title of Rajput because the caste
feeling is too strong in those parts and the change in their customis too
recent for it yeu to have died out, but who have, for all purposes of
equality, communion, or intermarriage, ceased to be Rájputs since they
took to the practice of karewa; we have the Sahnsars of Hoshiarpur
who were Rajputs within the last two or three generations, but have
ceased to be so because they grow vegetables like the Araín; in Karnál
we have Rájputs who within the living generation have ceased to be
Rájputs and become Shaikhs, because poverty and loss of land forced
them to weaving as an occupation; while the Delhi Chauhan, within the
shadow of the city where their ancestors once rulod and led the Indian
armies in their last struggle with the Musalmán invaders, have lost
their caste by yielding to the teinptations of karewa. In the Sikh
tract, as I have said, the Ját is content to be a Ját, and has never since
the rise of Sikh power wished to be anything else. In the Western
Plains the freedom of marriage allowed by Islám has superseded
caste restrictions, and social rank is measured by the tribe rather than
by the larger unit of caste. But even there, families who were a few



366
The Ját's status.
generations ago reputed Játs have now risen by social exclusiveness to
be recognised as Rajputs, and families who were lately known as
Rajputs have sunk till they are now classed with Játs; while the great
ruling tribes, the Siál, the Gondal, the Tiwána are commonly spoken of
as Rájputs, and their smaller brethren as Játs. The same tribe even is
Rajput in one district and Ját in another, according to its position
among the local tribes. In the Salt Range the dominant tribes, the
Janjía, Manhás and the like, are Rájputs whàn they are not Mughals
or Arabs; while all agricultural tribes of Indian origin who cannot
establish their title to Rajput rank are Játs. Finally, on the frontier
the Pathán and Baloch have overshadowed Ját and Rájput alike; and
Bhatti, Punwar, Túnwar, all the proudest tribes of Rajputána, are
included in the name and have sunk to the level of Ját, for there can
he no Rájputs where there are no Rájás or traditions of Rájás. I know
that the views herein set forth will be held heretical and profane by
many, and that they ought to be supported by a greater wealth of
instance than I have produced in the following pages. But I have no
time to marshal my facts; I have indeed no time to record more than
a small proportion of them; and all I can now attempt is to state the
conclusion to which my enquiries have led me, and to hope to deal with
the subject in more detail on some future occasion.'
These conclusions are confirmed by facts observed with regard to
other so-called castes, such as the Gaddis, Gujars, Kanets, Meos, and
others too numerous to mention. The term Ját may now connote a
caste in the ordinary acceptance of the term, but whatever its deriva-
tion may be, it came to signify, in contradistinction to Rájput, a
yeoman cultivator, usually owner of land, and in modern parlance Ját-
zamíndár is the usual description of himself which a Ját will give.
As Sir Denzil Ibbetson said :-
The position of the Ját in the Punjabi
"The Ját is in every respect the most important of the Panjab
peoples. In point of numbers be surpasses the Rájput, who comes next
to him, in the proportion of nearly three to one. Politically he ruled
the Padjab till the Khálsa yielded to our arins. Ethnologically he is
the peculiar and most prominent product of the plains of the five rivers.
And from an economical and adininistrative point of view he is the
husbandman, the peasant, the revenue-payer par excellence of the
Province. His manners do not bear the impress of generations of wild
freedom which marks the races of our f ontier mountains. But he is
more honest, more industrious, more sturdy, and no less manly than
they. Sturdy independence indeed and patient vigorous labour are his
strongest characteristics. The Ját is of all the Panjab races the most
impatient of tribal or communal control, and the one which asserts the
freedom of the individual most strongly. In tracts where, as in
Rohtak, the Ját tribes have the field to themselves, and are compelled,
in default of rival castes as enemies, to fall back upon each other for
somebody to quarrel with, the tribal ties are strong. But as a rule a
Ját is a man who does what seems right in his own eyes and sometimes
what seems wrong also, and will not be said nay by any man. I do not,
mean however that he is turbulent: as a rule he is very far from being
80. He is independent and he is self-willed; but he is reasonable,
Hlod,' very man sometim



Ját characteristics.
867
peaceably inclined if left alone, and not difficult to manage. He is
usually content to cultivate his fields and pay his revenue in peace and
quietness if people will let him do so; though when he does go wrong
he “takes to anything from gambling to murder, with perhaps a
preference for stealing other people's wives and cattle." As usual the
proverbial wisdom of the villages describes him very fairly, though
perhaps somewhat too severely: “The soil, fodder, clothes, hemp,
grass fibre, and silk, these six are best beaten ; and the seventh is the
Ját." "A Ját, a Bhát, a caterpillar, and a widow woman; these four
are best hungry. If they eat their fill they do barm.” « The Ját,
like a wound, is better when bound.” In agriculture the Ját is pre-
eminent. The market-gardening castes, the Aráíņ, the Máli, the Saini,
are perhaps inore skilful cultivators on a small scale; but they cannot
rival the Ját as landowners and yeoman cultivators. The Ját calls
himself zamindár or “ husbandman" as often as Ját, and his women and
children alike work with him in the fields: “The Ját's baby has a
plough handle for a plaything." "The Ját stood on his corn heap
and said to the king's elephant.drivers— Will you sell those little
donkeys ?” Socially, the Ját occupies a position which is shared by
the Ror, the Gujar, and the Abír, all four eating and emoking together.
He is of course far below the Rajput, from the simple fact that he
practises widow-marriage. The Ját father is made to say, in the
rhyming proverbs of the country side'Come my daughter and be
married ; if this husband dies there are plenty more.' But among the
widow-marrying castes he stands first. The Bánia with his sacred
thread, his strict Hinduism, and his twice-born standing, looks down on
the Ját as a Sudra. But the Ját looks down upon the Bánia as a
cowardly spiritless money-grubber, and society in general agrees with
the Ját. The Khatri, who is far superior to the Bánia in manliness and
vigour, probably takes precedence of the Ját. But among the races or
tribes of purely Hindu origin, I think that the Ját stands next after
the Brahman, the Rájpat, and the Khatri,
There are, however, Játs and Játs. I shall here do nothing more
than briefly indicate the broad distinctions. The Ját of the Sikh
tracts is of course the typical Ját of the Punjab, and he it is whom
I have described above. The Ját of the south-eastern districts differs
little from him save in religion ; though on the Bíkáner border the puny
Bágri Ját, immigrant from his rainless prairies where he has been
held in bondage for centuries, and ignorant of cultivation save in its
rudest form, contrasts strongly with the stalwart and independent
husbandman of the Málwa. On the Lower Indus the word Ját is
applied generically to a congeries of tribes, Játs proper, Rájputs, lower
castes, and mongrels, who have no points in common save their
Muhammadan religion, their agricultural occupation, and their
subordinate position. In the great western grazing grounds it is,
as I have said, impossible to draw any sure line between Ját and
Rájput, the latter term being commonly applied to those tribes who
have attained political supremacy, while the people whom they have
subdued or driven by dispossession of their territory to live a semi-
nomad life in the central steppes are more often classed as Játs; and
the stute of things in the Salt Range is very similar. Indeed the
word Ját is the Punjábi term for & grazier or herdsman ; though Mr.



368
The Ját elements.
E. O'Brien said that in Jatki, Ját, the cultivator, is spelt with a hard
and Ját, the herdanian or camel grazier, with a soft t. Thus the
word Ját in Rohtak or Amritsar means a great deal; in Muzaffargarb
or Bannu it means nothing at all, or rather perhaps it means a great
deal more than any single word can afford to mean if it is to be of
any practical use; and the two classes respectively indicated by the
term in these two parts of the Province must not be too readily
confounded.
The Ját elements.
The traditions of some of the more important Ját tribes as to their
origin are summed up below, but it must be confessed that these
traditions are not only hazy but often inconsistent and not infrequently
contradicted by legends current among the same tribe in another
locality
Afghán origin is asserted by the Langáh. Arab origin is claimed by
the l'ahim and Lilla. Brahman descent is alleged by the Golia and
Langriál - who say they were · Brahman Chárans. Ját descent is
admitted by the Bhullar, Her, and Mán; by the Sipra (Gils by origin),
the Bhangu, who say they came from Nepál, by the Waráich and
apparently the Nol. Rajput origin is vaguely alleged by the Bal,
Chbandhar Dhindsa (Saroha), Gbatwál (Saroha), Hijrá (Saroha), Mahal
and Sumrá.
Other Ját tribes bave more specific claims to Rajput ancestry.
Thus Solar Rájput origin is claimed by the Aulakh,* Bains,t Janjúa,
Bhutta, Buttar, Chábil (Týnwar), Deo, Dhotar, Ithwal, Kang, Lodika,
Punnun, Sáhi, Sindhu and Tárar; Lunar Rajput by the Dhillon (Saroha),
Ghunwan, Goraya (Saroha), Kahlon.
And in many cases the Ját tribe can point to the Rájput tribe from
which it sprang. For example, Bhatti Rájpút descent is claimed by the
Dhariwal, Randhawa, Sara, I and Sidhu ; Chaubán Rájput descebi by the
Ahlawat, Bajwa, Chatta, Chíma, Dehia, Jákhar, Marral, Sargwán, and
Sobal: Maphás Rájput blood by the Wirk : Punwár Rájput descént by
the Kharral, Harral and Sarai : Raghobansi Rajput origio by Gil :
Túnwar, by the Dhankar, Ráthi and Sabráwat: and Ruthor by the Dalál
and Deswál.
Similarly, in Gujrát the Muhammadan Ját tribes claim very diverse origins. Thus
Mughal origin is claimed by the Bhaddar, Malána, Marar and Narwai. who claim to be
Barlás ; and by the Bahlam, Chaughatta, Phiphrá, Mander and Babál, who claim to bo
Chaughatta. Awán origin is claimed by the Bhagwál, while the Hír claim to be descend.
ants of Qutab-ud-Din, like the Awáns and Khokhars. Quraish descent is claimed by the
Jam.
Khokhar Rájput descent is asserted by the Jáli; Punwár Rájput ancestry is claimed by the
Jakkhar and Siál; Sombansi descent and Rájput ancestry, i.e., a last status as Rájputs---
are claimed by the Janjúa Játs, Chauhán Játs, Dhúl, Sohiál, Kaliál, Goráyá, Langarbal,
Maral, and Mangat; Janjúa Rájput origin is claimed by the BHAKRBL, Tatla, Dabb,
Kanjiál and Ghumman; Gakkhar origin is asserted by the Kotharmal; Bhatti Rajput origin
is claimed by the Bhatti, Dhariwal Paroi, Tora, Dhamál Dbáli, Randháwa, Sahotra, Soya,
Surai, Kalwál, Kaher, Kawár, Korantáná, Guhlo Gudho, Gujrál, Liddar, Mehar, Mahota
• But one tradition makes them Lunar.
4 Bains is one of the 36 royal families of Rájputs, but was believed by Tod to be
Suryabansi.
I Also claiu Lunar descent.



The Ját localisation.
369
Multáni, Nijjrá, Hunjar and Hatián; Punnu (Surajbansi) origin is claimed by the Dudhrai
Poti, Gil, Thuthál, Mathi, Nat; Raghbausi by the Rahang Chauhán; Rajput origin is claimed
by the Thanel, Gohi and Kaler; Tár Rájput descent is claimed by the Takkhar; Langáh
Rajputs gave birth to the Chách, and Manhás to the Raihsi, Katwár Lohdrá, Mahé, Mair,
Nangiál and Wirk; Gondál Ját extraction is admitted by the Tolá, Jaspál, Sandrána, and
Ghug; Waraich by the Suggar; Dháriwál by the Sidh, and Ranjha by the Khamb,
Gudgor.
Distribution of the Játs.
Beyond the Punjab, Játs are chiefly found in Sindh where
they form the mass of the population; in Bíkáner, Jaisalmer, and
Márwár, where they probably equal in numbers all the Rajput
races put together, and along the upper valleys of the Ganges
and Jumna, from Bareli, Farrukhábád, and Gwalior upwards. In the
Punjab and North-West Frontier Province they are especially
Dumerous in the central Sikh districts and States, in the south-eastern
districts, and in the Deraját. Under and among the hills and in the
Ráwalpindi division Rájputs take their place, while on the frontier,
both upper and lower, they are almost wholly confined to the cis-Indus
tracts and the immediate Indus riverain on both sides of the stream.
The Játs of the Indus are probably still in the country which they
have occupied ever since their first entry into India, though they have
been driven back from the foot of the Sulaimáns on to the river by the
advance of the Pathán and the Baloch. The Játs of the Western Plains
have almost without exception come up the river valleys from Sindh
or Western Rájputána. The Játs of the western and central sub-
montane have also in part come by the same roate ; but some of them
retain a traditional connection with Ghazni, which perhaps refers to the
ancient Gajnípur, the site of the modern Ráwalpindi, while many of
them trace their origin from the Jammu Hills.
The Játs of the central and eastern Punjab have also in many cases
come up the Satlej valley; but many of them have moved from Bíkáner
straight into the Málwa, while the great central plains of the Málwa
itself are probably the original home of many of the Ját tribes of the
Sikh tract. The Játs of the south-eastern districts, and the Jumna zone
have for the most part.worked up the Jumna valley from the direction
of Bhartpur, with which some of them still retain a traditional connec-
tion; though some few have moved in eastwards from Bíkáner and the
Málwa. The Bhartpur Játs are themselves said to be immigrants who
left the banks of the Indus in the time of Aurangzeb. Whetber the
Játs of the great plains are really as late immigrants as they represent,
or whether tbeir story is merely founded upon a wish to show recent
connection with the country of the Rájputs, I cannot say. The whole
question is one in which we are still exceedingly ignorant, and which
would richly repay detailed investigation.
The Ját migrations.
A noteworthy feature of the Ját traditions is their insistence
on the recent advent of nearly every Ját tribe into the Punjab,
or at least into its present seats. Probably the only tract in
the Punjab in which the Ját has been well established from a
period anterior to the first Muhammadan invasion is the Rohtak



370
Ját migrations.
territory. If the history of the various tribes in Multán be investigated
it will be found that there is scarcely a single important tribe now found
in the District which has not immigrated within the last 500 or 600
years. The whole population in Multán has for many centuries been
in a state of constant flux, and it is of very little use trying to discover
who the original inhabitants were even in the pre-Muhammadan
times. The Khaks, Pándas, Pahors and Sahús in Kabírwala tahsil,
the Dhudhis in Mailsi, and the Kharas, north of Multán, are repated
vaguely to have been converted to Islám in the Multán district during
the 13th century, but the traditions cannot be trusted. When the Ain-z-
Akbari was compiled the Sahús, Sandas, Marrals, Tahíms, Ghallus,
Channars, Joiyas, Utheras and Khichis were settled in or near their
present seats, and tradition assigns many tribal immigrations to Akbar's
time.* The same might be said with much truth of almost every Ját
settlement throughout the Punjab plains. If we except the Nol and
Bhangu in Jhang, the Hinjra in Gujranwala and a few other clans,
tradition almost always makes a Ját tribe a comparatively recent
setiler in the Punjab. In Dera Ismail Khan, where the term Ját is
applied to Sials, Awáns and a host of petty tribes of miscellaneous
origin, the lower portion of the District was probably occupied by a
few scattered tribes of pastoral Játs before the 15th century. Early in
that century all tradition goes to show that an immigration of
Siyars, China, Khokhars, etc., set in from Multán and Bahawalpur.
Passing up the Indus these Ját tribes gradually occupied the country
on the edge of the Mían wali Thal and then crossed the Indus. East
of that river the Játs and Sayyids maintained a dominant position, in
spite of the somewbat later Baloch immigration which was of the
nature of a military occupation rather than a permanent colonisation,
and the whole of the Kachi or riverain on the east bank of the Indus
was divided in blocks among the Játs, a strip of the Thal or stoppe
being attached to each block. Ját tribes settled also in the Thal itself,
notably the Chinas and Bhidwal, the latter a good fighting tribe. The
Chipa tract stretched right across the Thal. The modern District of
Dera Ismail Khán was seitled in much the same way by the Játs, but
the Baloch also occupied it as cultivating proprietors, leaving the
actual occupation however to the Játs. Early in the 19th century
Sarwar Khắn of Tánk located large numbers of Játs in the
south-east of the present Tánk tabsil and this settloment gave the tract
its name of the Ját-átar.t Játs however appear to have been settled
in the modern Nutkáni Baloch country prior to that period, and to
have formed its original population.
The migrations of the Játs into Kapurthala also illustrate the history of the population
of the Punjab. Thus from Amritsar came the Gil, Padah, Ojla, Dhol, Randhawa Khera
and Samrai ; from Hoshiarpur the Dhadwal; from Sialkot came the Bajwá or Bajwai,
Goráya and Ghumman; from Gurdáspur the Mahesh; and from Lahore the Wirk, Sindhu
and Bhullar; from Gujranwala came the Dhotar, Baraich (Waráich), Pánglai, Kaler and
Johal, Suján and Battah; from the Málwá the Dháríwál ; and from Patiála the Chábil; from
Delhi came the Hundal, Dhadah, Bhaun, Bal, Bhandal, Bisaľand Bulai; from Sirsa tha
. See Mr. E. D. Maclagan's interesting sketch of the tribal immigrations in the Multán
Qasetteer, 1901-02, pp. 144-5.
+ There is also a Jatátar in Gujrát-see p. 306 supra. It appears to be identical with
the Herát, which may derive its name from the Her Játs, though a local tradition derives
it from Horát in Afghánistán, It is ourious that the Játs give their name to ao other
tracts,
spite of the military, Occurachi or rike, a strip of also in the Thod. The
-



Ját cults.
371
Basrai and Daulat; while from beyond the east of the Jumna came the Nijhar and Janer ;
and from Sabáranpur, the Dhillon : while the Baich say they came from the Ganges. The
Paddah have a tradition that they came from Ghazni.
m2
tivosain or by people bel cults in these boerved thil Ibbetsoil is
The cults of the Ját tribes.
The Játs of the Punjab cannot be said to have any distinctive tribal
cults. When Muhammadans or Sikhs they follow the teachings of
their creeds with varying degrees of strictness. When Hindus they
are very often SULTANIS or followers of the popular and wide-spread
cult of Sakhi Sarwar Sultán. In the south-east many are Bishnois.
The Shib-gotri Játs do not form a sectarian group. The only distinc-
tive Ját cults are tribal, and even in their case the sidh or sati, Jogi,
Gosáín or Bairagi, whosa shrine is affected by the tribe, is doubtless
worshipped by people of other tribes in the locality. For detailed
accounts of these tribal cults reference must be made to the separate
articles on the various Ját tribes in these volumes, but a few general
notes may be recorded here. It will be observed that these customs are
not as distinctive of the Játs of Sialkot as Sir Denzil Ibbetson thought.*
Parallels to them will also be found among the Khatris, and it is very
doubtful whether they can be held to indicate aboriginal descent.
Jathera.- Among the Hindu and Sikh Játs, especially in the north-
central and central Districts, a form of ancestor-worship, called jathera,
is common. It is the custom of many clans, or of a group of villages
of one clan, for the bridegroom at his wedding (biáh or shadi) to
proceed to a spot set aside to commemorate some ancestor who was either
a shahid (martyr) or a man of some note. This spot is marked by a
mound of earth, or it may be a pakka shrine. The bridegroom bows his
head to the spot and walks round it, after which offerings are made
both to the Brahman and the lagi.t If the mound is of earth, he throws
a handful of earth upon it. The name given to the jathera may be,
and generally is, that of an ancestor who was influential, the founder of
the tribe, or who was a shahid.
Jandi kátna or Jandián, the cutting of a twig of the janą tree.-
The bridegroom, before setting out for the marriage, cuts with a sword
or talwár a twig from a jand tree anywhere in the vicinity. He then
makes offerings to Brahmans. This ceremony ensures the success of
his marriage.
In those parts of the Gurgaon District which adjoin the Jaipur, Alwar
and Nábha States it is customary to fix a small wooden bird on the
outer door of the bride's house, and before the bridegroom is welcomed
by the women standing there he is required to strike it with his stick.
This ensures the happiness of the marriage. The rite is reminiscent of
the old Tar Pariksha or test of the bride. The bird is made of jand
wood. This is almost the only trace of any jandián ceremony in the
southern Punjab. I
__
_
* Ibbetson, § 421.
+ The menial who is entitled to receive dues (lág) at weddings, etc.
In Hissár the jandien rite is rare, though that of jathera is said to be almost universal.
But in that District the observances are local, rather tban tribal and the Bágʻi Játo do
not perform the jandián in Hissár though they would observe it in the Bágar, where it is
general.



372
The chhatra rite.
The jandián rite is very common in the central Panjab,* but it as-
sumes slightly different forms. Thus among the Hans Játs of Ludhiána
the bridegroom's uncle or elder brother cuts the tree with an axe or
sword and the bridal pair play with the twigs, chhitián, the boy first
striking the girl seven times with them, and she then doing the same
to him. Worship is then offered to a Brahman and after that the
house-walls are marked with rice-flour. The pair solemnly prostrate
theinselves, worship Sakhi Sarwar and give the offerings made to him
to a Bharái. The Daleo, Aulakh, Pammar, Basi. Dulat, Boparai, and Bal,
have the same usage as regards the chhițián, but among the Gurum
Jáțs the boy himself cuts the tree and both he and his bride 'worship
chhatras. But the Lat do not cut the jandi at all.
Chhutra.-In connection with the observance, common at Hindu
weddings, of the tika, there is a curious custom called the chhatra (ram)
or chhedna (to bore the am's ear). In this a ram is hired, 8 paisa
(Nának.shahi) being paid to its owner. The bridegroom cuts off a
small piece of its ear and rubs this piece on the cat till the blood flows.
He then places the piece in the centre of a chapáti, with some rice
and, smearing his thumb with the mixture, imprints a ţika or mark
with it on his forehead. The chapáti is then offered at a shrine,
food is distributed and the lágís each receive at least 14 paisa (Nának-
sháhi). In some cases the ram or goat is also sacrificed.
Among the Játs of the south-eastern Punjab the chhatra rite, involv-
ing as it does animal sacrifice, is unknown. This is clearly due to Jain
influences. It is very rare in the central Districts too, and is said to
be unknown in Jullundur, but in Ludhiana it is not uncommon for the
bridegroom's forehead to be marked with blood from a goat's ear, e. g.
among the Chela, Bhangu and some others.
Not only do these usages vary among different tribes, some not.
observing them at all while others perform one or two or all of them,
but a given tribe may have varying usages in different localities.
Thus the Bhúlars' cult of Kalanjar has already been described at
p. 108 supra, but they are also said to have a jathera called Pír
Yar Bhuráwála, t a revered ancestor who performed a miracle by turning
a blanket into a sheep, and to this day the Bhular will not wear, sit
or sleep on a striped blanket. Their Sidh Kalenjar or Kalangar is also
called Kalandra, and he has a tomb at Mári in Pațiála where the first
milk of a cow is offered to him on the 8th badi of the month. A
Bhúlar too can only build a house after offering him two bricks. The
Bhúlar also avoid the use of ak fuel.
The Cháhil as noted on p, 146 supra affect a Jogi pír, but he is
also said to have been their jathera. He was killed in a fight with the
Bhatti Rajputs at a place in Patiala, but his body remained on his
horse and continued to smite the foe after his head had fallen, so &
shrine was built to him on the spot where he fell and it also contains
But it is said to be unknown in Jullundur.
+ Apparently the Bhúrá Sidh of the Sialkot Bhulars. Bhúrú means & striped blanket, of
light brown with black stripes, or black with white stripes, and the Bhúrá are also said
To bo a division of the Játs. Bhúrá also means brown, Panjábi Dicty., p. 146. Clearly
there is either a pun in the Dame or Bhúrú was the original name of the tribe.



Sathera worship.
373
ach man such as a
blood from the be
the tombs of bis hawk, dog and horse. It lies in a grove, and the
milk of a cow or the grain of a harvest are never used without offering
first fruits to this pár. The fact that the pir is called or named Jogi
points to a Shaiva origin for the cult.
The Chíma again are said to be served by Jogís, and not by Brahmans.
They perform jathera and chhatra as follows :--Eight or ten days before
a marriage rice is cooked and taken to the spot dedicated to their
ancestor; from one to five goats are also taken thither and washed
and a lamp is lighted. One of the goats' ears is then cut, and the
brotherhood mark their foreheads with blood (chhatra). The goat is
killed for food, but the immediate relatives of the bride do not eat of
its flesh, which is divided among the others; the rice, however, is
distributed to all.
The Deo have their jathera at a place close to some pool or tank
where on certain occasions, such as a wedding, they congregate. The
Brahman marks each man's forehead as he comes out of the pool with
blood from the goat's ear: this is done to the bridegroom also. The
bread at the feast is divided, 9 loaves to every bachelor and 18 to every
married man.
As already noted, on p. 236 supra, the Dhariwal have a jathera
and also a sidh, called Bhai or Bhoi. The latter was slain by robbers.
A Brahman, a Mirási, a Chúhra and a black dog were with him at the
time. The Brahman fled, but the others remained, and so Mirásís
receive his offerings, and at certain ceremonies a black dog is fed frst.
The Sidh's tomb is at Lalowála in Patiala, and his fair is held on the
Nimání Ikádshí.
T'he Dhillon appear to have several jațheras, Gaggowahna being
mentioned in addition to those described on p. 238 supra. No particu-
lars of these are forthcoming. But the fact that Dhillon was Rájá
Karn's grandson is commemorated in the following tale :-Karn used
to give away 30 sers of gold every day after his bath but before his
food. After his death the deity rewarded him with gold, but allowed
him no food, so he begged to be allowed to return to the world where
he set aside 15 days in each year for the feeding of Brahmans. He
was then allowed to return to the celestial regions and given food.*
Other jatheras are Bábá Alho, of the GAREWÁLS, Rájá Rám of the
Gils, Rajput (sic) of the KHAIRA, Sidhsan, of the RANDHAWAS, Tilkara,
of the SIDHUS and Kálá Mihr of the Sindhus.†
The Dhindsa have a sidh, of unrecorded name, at a place in Pațiála
and offer milk, etc., to his samadh on the 6th sudi of each month. The
* The Dhillons have the following kabit or saying--Sat jindki bahin, Dhillon kadh kosatti
zahin, meaning that a Dhillon will always perform what he has promised.
t". Among the genuine Játs, or those who can look back to a Rájput origin, it is not
uncommon to find a great veneration paid to the thehs or mounds which in bygone days
were the sites of their first location. They are marked by a few scattered tombs or a grove
of trees, or have since been selected by some shrivelled faqir as the place suitable for a
solitary life. With the Játs, it is also curious to which the reverence they day to the
jand tree, which is often introduced into these places of worship. The Rájputs are more
lofty in their religion, and more rigorous in their discharge of it."-Prinsep's siálkot,
Sett. Rep., p. 27.



374
Tribal vs. Village deities.
to dig earth frotho has a mate Diwali night. Ihd
Gil sidh is named Surat Rám and only gets a goat and a handful of our
at weddings, an offering which is taken by Mírásis. The Gandi bave
a sati whose møit or shrine is in Pațiála.
Jatheras are also commonly worshipped in the central Districts, but
the rites vary. Thus in Ludhiána nearly every Ját tribe bas & jathera
though his name is rarely preserved, and a very common fond of wor.
ship to him is to dig earth from a tank at weddings in his honour.
Thus Tulla, the Basis' jathera, who has a mat or shrine, is com-
memorated in this way and earth is also dug on the Diwali night. The
Sarapiya and Sodi Játs also dig earth to their unnamed jațheras and
the Daula, Dhad, Sangra and many others do the same. The Dhanesar
have a special custom, for after the jandi has been cut, water is poured
over a goat's head, and if he shivers the ancestors are believed to have
blessed the pair. The goat is then set free. The GHANGHAS in this
District appear to have no jathera but make offerings, which are taken
by Sikhs, to the samadh of Akál Dás, their ancestor, at Jandiala in
Amritsar, where an annual fair is held.
Thus the jathera rite is essentially a tribal, not a village, institution
and this is strikingly brought out by the fact that in villages composed
of several tribes each tribe will bave its own jathera. Thus in Kang, in
Jullundur, the Kang Játs have no jathera, but they have one at Dhauli
Mambli in Garhshankar tahsil, and say he was a refugee from Mu-
hammadan oppression. The Mors of Kang have their jathera at
Khankhána, the Birks theirs at Birk, the Rakkars theirs at Rakkar,
the Jhalli theirs at Dhamot in Ludhiána. But the jathera is often a
sati, and the Her iu Jullundur have a sati's shrine at Kala Májra in
Rupar tahsil. And it is not necessarily the progenitor of the clan, or
even the founder of a village who is worshipped, but any prominent
member of it who may be chosen as its jathera. Thus among the
Dhillon of Mahrampur it is not Gola, its founder, who is worshipped,
but Phalla, his descendant and a man of some note. And at Garcha
the Garcha Játs worship Adhiána, a spot in the village named after
Adi, one of their ancestors who was an ascetic. The place now forms
a grove from which fuel may be gathered by Brahmaps, but no wood
may be cut by Játs under penalty of sickness or disaster. When the
jathera is at any distance it is sufficient to turn towards it at a wedding
and it is only visited at long intervals.
In marked contrast to the tribal jathera is the village bhúmia of the
south-eastern Punjab. There, when a new colony or village is founded
in the south-east Punjab the first thing to be done before houses are
actually built is to raise a mound of earth on a spot near the proposed
village and plant a jand tree on it. Houses are then built. The first man
who dies in the village, whether he be a Brahman, a Ját or a Chamár,
is burnt or buried on this mound, and on it is built a masonry shrine
which is named after him. The fortunate man is deified as the Bhúmia
or oarth-god, and worsbipped by Hindus of all classes in the village,
being looked upon as its sole guardian deity. At weddings the bride-
groom before starting to the bride's village resorts to this shrine and
makes offerings to him. If an ox is stolen, a house is broken into, or
pestilence breaks out, if crops fail or the rainfall is scanty, if locusts



Ját divisions.
375
visit the village or any other calamity befall, Bhúmia's shrine is the
first place to which the Játs resort for divine help.
Such faith is placed in this deity that in the event of plague the
villagers will not vacate their houses without consulting the Bhúmia.
Thus in Jind we find the Paogát with a tribal Sidh and also a Bhúmiá
in every village. Nearly every Ját tribe in that State has its Bhúmia,
but some have a Khera instead, and others again style their jathera
Khera Bhúmia. Such are the Cháhil. The Labánah affect the Khera
alone. The Dalál reverence Jogis and the Bhanwala Gosáins, while the
Gathwal and Lámbe are said to have Bairagis as their jatheras; and
the Ridhu have Nágás for jațheras, but also worship Khera Bhúmia.
Probably the Jogi, Bairági, Gosáin or Nágá is the tribal, and the Khera
the village deity or his representative. But several tribes, the Bhordar,
Bhangu, Kharod, Radhána and Tamána worship the Khera as their
jathera, and a few, the Baring, Baniwál, Boparai, Jatára, Khagura,
Lát, Sobi, Thand and Tur have no jathera at all.
Instances of Játs accepting votive offerings appear to be very rare, but
Játs, not Brahmans, take the offerings made in cash or kind at the
shrine of Sítla Devi at Gurgáon.
The divisions of the Játs.
The Játs of the south-east Punjab have two territorial divisions, Des-
wáli from des, the plain or country, and Bágri, from the bágar or upland
in Bíkáner. The Deswali claim to be superior to the latter, but it is
often difficult to say to which group a tribe belongs. Thus the Bhaini-
wál claim to be Deswáli, but they are really Bágļi a's are probably the
CHÁHALS—whose connection with the legend of Gúga is consistent with
their immigration from the Bágar.
The Játs of the south-east have also two other divisions, Shib-gotra
and Káshib-gotra, The former are also called asl or real Játs and con-
fess that their progenitor sprang from Shiva's matted hair and was so
called ; at bhadrá. They have 12 gots, which are descended from the
12 sons of Barh, who conquered a large part of Bíkáner. His descend-
ants are chiefly sprung from Punia and they beld the country round
Jhansal.
These 12 gots are
1. Punia.
5. Barbra.
9. Khokha,
2. Dhanian.
6. Solahan.
10. Dhanaj.
3. Chhacharik.
7. Chiria.
11. Letar.
4. Bali.
8. Chandia.
12. Kakar,
At weddings the Brahman at the sakha or announcement gives out
their gotra as Káshib-gotra-not Shib-gotra. These 12 gots are said
not to form exogamous groups, but only to marry with the Káshib
gotra* who claim Rájput descent. The Shib-gotras must, however
* Original Rájput clan.
Tunwar
Ját tribes derived from it.
Palápiá, Bachbi, Nain, Mallán, Lánbá, Khatgar, Karb,
Jatáasrá, Dhánd, Bbádo, Kharwal, Dháká, Sokhirá,
Bánchiri, Málú, Ronil, dákan, Berwál and Nárú.
Bhákar, Khongá, Lákhlán, Sawánch, Sohú, Cháhal,
| Ghel, Bảo, Nahra, Panthal, Luni, Jấgiáp, Bhanni
Chanhán



376
Ját totems.
form exogamous sections, though it may be that, as a general rule, they
give daughters to the Káshib-gotra. The term Shib-gotra clearly implies
some disparagement, but the Punia were once an important tribe be-
cause there used to be six cantons of Játs on the borders of Hariána and
Bíkáner, and of these four, viz., Punia, Kassua,* Sheorán and Gcuára
consisted of 860 villages each
The Bágri Játs have certain sections which might appear totemistic,
but very rarely is any reverence paid to the totem. Such are :-
Karír, a tree, Kohár, a hatchet, Waihți, a young beifer, Bandar,
monkey, Gídar, jackal; also Katáriá, sword, and Gandásiá axe, Piplá,
pípal, and Jandiá, jand tree, all in tahsil Hánsi. The JARIA and
others are said to be named from parts of the ber tree, but Jaria
itself is also explained as meaning 'descended from twins, jora,' and
they are said to be an offshoot of the Gathwal. Mor is so called
because a peacock protected their ar cestor from a snake. Pankhal,
peacock's feather, is so called because a Dohán Ját girl had been given
in marriage to one Tetha, a Rájput of Musham. The couple disagreed and
Tetha aided by the royal forces attacked the tribe and only those who
had placed peacock's feathers on their heads were sparod.
Jún is said to mean louse, and Goráya, blue cow or níl gái. I
wál, Legha, Japáwá, Bedwal, Mahlú, Wihá, Mebcán,
Rápariá, Bháriwás, Bohlá, Mor, Sinhmár, Mábil,
Goyat, Lobáp, sheorán, * Lobháwat, Somaddhar,
Dohan, Hela, Lohách, Rámpúriá, Sedhú, Hoda,
Sámin, Rojis, Bháná alias Chotiá, Bhattú, Rár and
Lomadb.
Bhatti
Láhar, Sara, Bharon, Mákar, Mond, Kobar, Sabaran,
Isharwal, Khetalán, Jatái, Khodmá, Blodá, Batbó
and Dhokia.
Saroya
Kaleráwan, Bhore, Hinjráwan, Saroya, Kájlá, Ghe.n.
ghas, Saráwat, Sori, Khot and Balra.
Punwar
Kharwán, Pachár, Lob-Chab and Moban.
Khokbar
Boblá and Khokhar..
Joiya
Páeal, Mondhlá, Khichar, Jápi, Máchrá, Kachroya,
Sor and Joiyá.
Ráthor
Dulláh and Gáwarná.
Gablot
Godárá.
Paniár
Bonds and Tarar.
Lal
Jaria.
Ude
Jákbar.
Kachhwái
Dhondwal.
Kihchi
Khichar.
* The Kugsua cannot be traced,
+ Elliot's Races of the North-Western Provinces, II, p. 55.
+ Certain villages in Hissár derive their names from a tradition that a giant was killed
and each of bis limbs gave a name to the place where it fell, e.g.:-
1. Sarsad = where the giant's sar (head) føll.
2. Balak =
1 . .., bál (hair) fell
Palra
? ? ? pab (foot) fell.
4. Bicbpari = s e i middle part (bich-ka-hissa) body fell.
5. Kanwa 5
kan (ear) fell.
i Hathwa =
hath (hand) fell.
7. eura
jewar (ornament) fell.
cimtim



Jatála-Jathiána.
*
377
Social distinctions among the Jáțs.
Among the Játs the only* social distinctions are the well-known
• Akbari' or Darbári makáns-35 in number according to the usual
account. But in Amritsar the Akbari is only the highest of a series of
four grades, the Aurangzebi (or those admitted to this rank in the
time of Aurangzeb), Khalsai (or those admitted in Sikh times) and
Angrezi (or those admitted since British rule began) being the other
three, and no less than 150 villages, all generally speaking in the
Mánjba, now claim Darbári status, There is also a Shahjahani grade,
the Sáosi Játs, of Rájá Sánsi, having been admitted in the reign of
Shah Jahán. The origin of the Akbari group is thus described. When
the emperor Akbar took in marriage the daughter of Mihr Mitha, a Ját,
of the Mánjha,t 35 of the principal Ját, and 36 of the leading Rájput
families countenanced the marriage and sent representatives to Delhi.
Three of those Ját families are still found in Hoshiarpur, and are called
the Dháigbar Akbari, as they comprise the Bains Játst of Máhilpur,
the Labotas of Garhdiwály and the Khungas of Budhipind, which latter
is styled the half' family, so that the three families are called the 21
(dháighar). The Akhari Játs follos some of the higher castes in not
allowing remarriage of widows, and in practising darbára, whicb is a
castom of giving vails at weddings to the mirásis of other Akbari
families. Their parohits also place the janen on them at their mar-
riages, removing it a few days afterwards. Beloro the Akhari (according
to the Hoshiarpur account) is the Darbári grade, descendants of those
who gave daughters to the emperor Jahángír. Thus some of the Man
Játs are Darbáris, and they will only marry with Darbáris as & rule.
But they will accept brides from Játs of grades below the Darbári
provided the dower (dahej) is sufficiently large.
As regards Gurdaspur, Sir Louis Dane wrote:-"Some of the better
gots of Hindu Játs or those living in celebrated villages or námas will
not give their daughters to men of gots considered socially inferior, and
the restriction often gave rise to female infanticide, as eligible huse
bands were scarce.'
JATÁWA, (1) an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery and Amritsar,
(2) a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Maltán.
JATÁTIR, a Ját clan found in Sialkot.
JATAEDÁR, a Sikh title. Lit. one who keeps the jag or uncut matted hair of a
faqir and so a strict Sikh as opposed to the Munna Sikh who shaves.
See also under Jogi.
JATHIÁNA, a Kharral clan (agricultoral) found in Montgomery,
* Mr. J. R. Drummond indeed observed :-" There can be no question that the Randhá-
was, who are still Thákurs in their native homes, I believe, in Rájputána, are at the head
of the hypergamous scale among those Játs who have a more or less distinctly Rajput
origin, such as the Gil, Sindhu, Sidhu.Barár (or Variár), Pannu and the like. Unfor-
tunately no one seems able to say what the hypergamous scale among the Ját gots is, and
several informants explicitly say that there is none.
+ The Mihr Mitha who figares in the tradition of the Dháriwáls must be intended. It
is hardly necessary to say that neither Akbar nor Jahangir erer took a Ját bride.
I The Baids Ját have a bára or group of 12 villages near Máhilpor, bot the possession
of a bára does not appear to make the Gil Sánghe or Pote Játs Akbari thongh they too
DOSSADA báras. The Mán too have a bára, but some of them are only Darbári and not all
f thom have that standing,



878
Jathol-Játu.
JATHOL, a small Ját clan found in Sialkot, and in Amritsar (where it is
classed as agricultural). Its jathera, Bábá Amar Singh, has a khôngah
of masonry, to which offerings are made at weddings.
JATiána, a clan of the Siáls.
JATKATTA, from jat=wool or the hair of the body; and kattá-spioning :
a weaver (Gujrát Sett. Rep., Mackenzie, $ 53).
JATKE, a Kbarral clan (agrioultural) found in Montgomery.
JÁTLI, & Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JATOI. (1) an agricultural clan found in Shahpur ; (2) one of the original
main sections of the BALOCB, but not now an organised tribe. Found
wherever the Baloch havo spread. Io Montgomery it is classed as
agricultural. In the Chonáb Colony it is the most numerous of the
Baloch tribes.
JATOWÁL, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JÁTo, a Rájput tribe, said to be a Tánwar clan who once held almost the
whole of Hissár, and are still most numerous in that District and the
neighbouring portions of Rohtak and Jind. When the great Chauhán
Bisaldeo overthrew Anangpál II, the Túnwar king of Delhi, the
Túnwars were driven from Delhi to Jalopattan in the Sheikhawatti
country north of Jaipur and there Dul Rám, a descendant of Anangpál,
ruled. His son Jairát extended the Túowar dominion to Bágar in Jaipur
and the tract is still called the Túnwarwati. In fact the Túnwar of
Hariána are said to have been divided into three clans named after and
descended from, three brothers, Játu, Raghu and Satraula, of which
clans Játu was by far the largest and most important, and once ruled
from Bhiwáni to Agroha. They are the hereditary enemies of the Punwar
of Rohtak, and at length the sandhills of Mahm were fixed upon as the
boundary between them, and are still known as Játu Punwar ka daula
or the Játu-Punwar boundary. In Karnál, however, the Játu describe
themselves as Chauhan also.
Jairát, the Túnwar, had a son, Játu, (so-called because he bad hair,
játa, on him at the time of his birth) by a Sárkla Rajputní, and his
son migrated to Sirsa where he married Palát Devi, daughter of
Kanwarpál, a Sirohá Rájput and sister of the mother of the great Gúga
Pír. Kanwarpál made the tract aboat Hánsí over to his son-in-law and
the latter sent for his brothers Raghu and Satraula from Jilopattan to
share it with him. Játu's sons, Sidh and Harpál, founded Rájli and
Gurána villagos, and on the overthrow of the Chauhan Rai Pithaora by
the Muhammadans the Játus extended their power over Agroha, Aánsi,
Hissar and Bhiwani, their boast being that they once ruled 1,440 kheras
or settlements. Amrata also seized 40 villages in the Kánaud (Mohin-
dargarh) ilúga of Patiala. The three brothers, Játu, Raghu and
Satraula divided the pargana of Hánsi into tbree tappas, each pamed
after one of themselves. Umr Singh, one of their descendants took
Toshám, and after him that ilaga was named the Umrain tappa, while
that of Bhiwani was called the Bachwán tappa, after one Bacho, a Játu.
At Siwani Játu's descendants bore the title of Rai, those of Talwaydi
: Ráná that of Ráná, while those at Kulheri were called Chaudhri. In



Jaun-Jewátha.
379
1857 the people at once revived all their ancient titles, but the descen-
dants of Harpál, a son of Játu, remained loyal, the descendants of Sádh,
another of Játu's sons, having rebelled.
The Játus, Raghus and Satraulas do not, it is said, intermarry. The
Játos are nearly half Hindus, the rest being Muhammadans. The
Játus appear to give their name to Jatusápa in Gurgaon.
JAUN, a tribe of Játs descended from an eponym, who was a Ját of Hinjráon
descent.
JAUND, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
JAURA, (1) a Hindu and Muhammadan Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in
Montgomery, (2) & Khokhar clan (agricultural) found in Shábpur.
JAUBAN, (1) a Ainda Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery; (2)
a Khatrí got.
Jawá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JAWABI, a well-known sept of the Adam Khel Afrídis, dwelling in the
range between Kohát and Peshawar. In Kobát they hold Upper
Gandiali and Togh.
JAwía, a tribe of Játs, immigrants from Sirsa but found in Siálkot. They
claim kinship with the Bhatřís, but now intermarry with Játs.
JETHAL, & small clan, found only in the Jhelum Thal between the river of
that name and the Lilla estates. It claims Bhatti Rajput descent, but
ita pedigree is traced to Bhatta who some 12 or 14 generations ago
married the sister of Ghorian king's wife. The king, however, drove
Bhutta with bis 21 sons into the Bár, whence Jethal crossed the Jhelum
and settled at Ratta Pind, now a mound near Kandwal. They also
say they were settled at Neh of Sayyid Jalál in Babáwalpur which
points to descent from the Bhuttas of Multán. They usually inter-
marry among themselves, but occasionally with the Lillas. Omitting
the mixture of Hindu and Musalmán names which appears in the
earlier part of their pedigree table, it is given as follows:-
Rájá Panwár. 1
Gandar.
These four namos appear in the tree of the BætTTAS.
Balangi.
Viran.
J
Bhutta.
Jethal (and 20 others, including Langáh, Bhatti, Kharral and Harrar).
Akki.
Rán.
Skrang Mela. Kkh. Wanawake
(111. generation now
(10th generation (12th goneration in
in Jethal.)
' in Kabana.) Dhudhi and Musiana.)
JETOZAI, a Pathán olan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
JEWÁTHA, a sept of the Silharia Rajputs, found in Sialkot.



380
Jhabel-Jhajhar.
JBABEL (or as they are called in the Ain-z-Akbari CHHABEL), a fishing tribe
found in the Multán and Muzaffargarh districts, and in Jullundur,
Hoshiarpur, Kapurthala and Gurdaspur. Closely resembling the
KEBALS and Mors the Jhabels in Muzaffargarh once had the reputation
of being candibals. They live mainly by fishing and gathering pabbans
(seeds of the water-lily), say they came from Sindh and of all the
tribes in the District alone speak Sindhi. They also enjoy the title of
Jám. Many have now taken to agriculture and all aro reckoned good
Muhamınadans. They are fond of growing samúka,* a grain sown in
the mud left by the rivers. In Gardaspur they say they came from
the south, and that their ancestors were sportsmen, a Bhatti, founder of
their Katre got, a Nárú, from whom sprang their Nareh and Bhugge
gots, and so on. They fell into poverty and took to selling game.
Tbese Jhabels do not intermarry with those on the Indas and Sutlej,
but only with those on the north bank of the latter river. Some are
cultivators and even own land. Others are shikáris, but some are
boatmen and they look down on those who are and refuse to marry
with them. The Jhabels of Jullundur have the same usages as the
Meuns and other fisher-folk of that District. Some of them, owing to
want of employment as boatmen have left their villages for the towns
and taken to tailoring, weaving, well-sinking, chaukidári, and small
posts in Government service.
The Jhabels also preserve the jhulka custom. The large fire needed
for cooking the eatables required at a wedding must be lighted by a
son-in-law of tlie family, but when he attempts to bring a blazing
bundle (jhulka) of wood, etc., and put it under the furnace, he is met
by all the females of the family and has to run the gauntlet, as they
try to stop his progress with pitchers full of water, bricks, dust, and
sticks. This game is played so seriously that the women's dresses
often catch fire and they, as well as the son-in-law, are seriously hurt.
When he finally succeeds in lighting the fire, the son-in-law gets a
turban and a rupee, or more if the family is well-to-do. This usage is
occasionally observed among Aráíņs, Dogars, and Gujars too, but it is
falling out of fashion.
Like the Meuns the Jhabels will not give the milk or curds of an
animal which has recently calved to any one, not even to a son-in-law,
outside the family. After 10 or 20 days rice is cooked in the milk and
it is given to maulavis or to beggars. It can then be given away to
anybody. The Jhabels are good Muhammadans, but revere Khwaja Pir
or Khwaja Khizr, the god of water, and offer porridge to him in lucky
quantities at least once a year. It is taken to the river or a well and
after some prayers distributed there or in the village to all who are
present.
JAAD, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Jaáik, a sept of Kaneis which derives its name from Jhálri in Rawin pargana
of Jubbal and supplies hereditary wazirs to that State. At one time
these wazirs virtually ruled Jubbal.
JHAJHAR, an Aráín clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
* Ophismenus frumentuceus.



Jhakar-Jhinwar.
381
JHAKAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shujábád tahsil, Multán District.
JAAKKAR, son of Jai and eponym of a tribe in Multán : see Nún.
JÐALAN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JHALL, a small clan of Játs in Ambála. The word is said to mean “mad.".
JHÁman, Chháman, a man, apparently a Chuhța, who fulfils the functions of
a Brahman at a Chuhra wedding and conducts the seven pheras at it:
(Sirmúr).
JHAMAT, a Muhamınadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multáu and
Montgomery. See Jhummat.
JHANDA, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JAANDIB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Multán.
JAANDÍR, a semi-sacred tribe of Muhammadans said to be of Qureshi origin
like the Nekokára. Though they do not openly profess to be religious
directors, there is a certain odour of sanctity about the tribe. Most of
them can read and write, and they are “particularly free from ill deeds
of every description." They own land in the extreme south of the
Jhang District and are also found in the Mailsi tahsil of Multán. They
are said to have been the standard-bearers of cne of the greit saints,
whence their name.
JHANDO, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JHANDUANA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JHANJOTE, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Jeara, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JHARI, a sept of Játs in Jind : see under Jaria.
JHATTA, a section of the Mirásís, from ore of whose families Jabángír (they
assert) took Núr Jahan, wbo was a Mirásan, and so it got the title of
jhatta.
JBÁWARí, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
JHEDU, Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
JBÍNWAR, JALWAR. The Jhínwar,* also called Kahár in the east, and Mahra,t
where a Hindu, in the centre of the Province, is the carrier, water-man,
fisberman and basket-maker of the east of the Punjab. He carries palan-
quins and all such burdens as are borne by a yoke on the shoulders; and
he specially is concerned with water, insomuch that the cultivation of
waternuts and the netting of water fowl are for the most part in his hands,
and he is the well-sinker of the Province. He is a true village menial,
receiving customary dues and performing customary service. In this
capacity he supplies all the baskets needed by the cultivator, and brings
water to the men in the fields at harvest time, to the houses where the
women are səcluded, and at weddings and other similar occasions. His
* Or Jhír, fem. Jhírí, in Kángra, where the Jhír is a water-carrier.
+ Mabra seems to be a title of respect, just as a Bhishti is often addressed as Jamadár.
But in Jind at least the Mahra is a palanquin-bearer and the Saqqá is a water-carrier,
Haháy is a synonym for “ chief " in the south-west of the Province. When employed as a
waterman the Jhinwar is often called Panibárá.
The carriage of burdens slung from a hangi or yoke seems to be aimost unknown in the
wost the Punjab.



382
Jhinwar synonyms.
occupations in the centre and west of the Province are described under
MÁC8HI. His social standing is in one respect high ; for all will drink
at his hands. But he is still a seryant, though the highest of the class.
The Bhishtí, Máshki and Saqqa, the terms for Musalmán water-
carriers, may be of other castes than Jhínwar, but as a rule they would
belony to that caste.
The Jhíwars, as a caste, are one of these occupational groups found
in the Punjab which are conventionally called castes but which really
include or overlap numerous other 'castes ' of similar status and kindred
occupation. When a man of the Jhíwar caste is a baker or seller of
ready-cooked food he is called and apparently becomes a Bhatiára by
caste as well as by occupation. Similarly, the Jhíwar who parches gram
is styled a Bharbhúnja in the east of the Punjab or a Bhojwa,* whereas
in the west of the Province he remains a Jhíwar or rather a Máchhi and
is on the Indus styled a Chatári.
If the Jhíwar on the other hand plies a boat or skin for hire he will
be called and become a MALLÁĦ, a Dargái, a Dren, a Táru or even a Ját
or a Mohána according to the locality in which he works, his religion,
and the kind of craft he uses. Malláh is the most usual term for a boat-
man, but Mohána which is said to mean a fisherman in Sindh, is in the
Punjab as often applied to a fisherman as to a boatman. The Daryai is
a Persianised form of Dren, the Muhammadan waterman who ferries
people across and down the rapid hill rivers on inflated hides. If a
Hindú he is styled Táru. On the Indus the boatman ranks as and would
be called simply a Ját. Lastly, the MÁCHHI may acquire land, form a
tribe and rank as a land-owning community under its own tribal chiefs,
as in Baháwalpur ; or the Dhínwars may sink to the level of a criminal
tribe. But even these do not exhaust the synonyms and sub-divisions
of the Jhínwar caste.
As in the case of the Machhís, the sub-divisions of the Jhínwar are
very numerous, the largest are the Khokhar, Mahár, Bhatti, Manhas,
Tank and Suhál. These groups do not appear to be found in any num-
bers among the Bhatyára or Bharbhúnja.
Jhiwar origins.
According to one account Akís, a Chadhán Rájput of Garh Mukhiala
(in the Salt Range), died leaving a son of tender age named Dhíngar.
The people treated him as a servant and nicknamed him Jhíwar.
Bhat, his son, who fed the people at each full moon with rice, had four
sons, who founded 4 muhins, each containing several gots :-
Muhins. Gots. Muhins. Gots.
Mákbu
(Manni.
3. Dhengi
Mande.
Dhain.
(Dhengi?
(Bha),
Gádri ?
Harsní.
Khone.
2. Ghul
3 Waddao.
k Gadri i
( Malle.
(Dhogle.
1. Lúngo ) Sotre.
* The Bhoiwa is also a grain.parcher. Bhujwas form an “occupational " rather than &
regular caste and in the United Provinces include Kayaths, Ahírs, etc. In the Punjab
Muhammadans also ply this trade and most of them are immigrants from the united Pro.
vinces who accompaniod tho British troops in the Sikh Wars, -N. I, N. Q. I. 21%.



Jhinwar groups.
388
According to Sir Richard Temple* a Jhíwar is said to have taken to
wife Ráni Kokilan, the guilty heroine of the Rája Rasálu legend and she
had by him three sons from whom are sprung the three Punjab gots
Sabír, Gabír and Sír.
Territorial groups.
The territorial grouping of the Jhínwars is vague. In the Shakar-
garh tahsil of Gurdaspur is a Dogra group. In the Jullundur Doáb
the groups appear to be three in number (i) Panjabi or indigenous, (ii)
Bángrú,t immigrants from the Bángar, and (iii) Chhangru. In Pațiála
we find the usual grouping, Deswál and Multáni, but in Jínd Bángrú and
Panjábi are reported. Lastly, in the south-east about Nárnaul are
found the Bágrís.
The Bángrú do not intermarry with the Panjábís. The former ascribe
their immigration to Akbar's reign, during which at the siege of Chittaur,
a Jhíwar was killed and his brother desired to marry his widow, but she
refused to consent and fled to the Bíst doába with her infant son.
The remaining groups appear to be usually, but not rigidly, en-
dogamous.
Occupations and occupational groups.
The Jhínwars are a remarkably composite caste and comprise several
groups whose names depend on their various occupations, and indeed
probably vary with the occupations they pursue from time to time.
In the south-east we find Dhínwarf as a synonym of Jhínwar.
Kahár may also be regarded as a synonym in the sense that it desig.
nates a Jhíwar employed as a carrier, especially a doli-bearer.
Sodiá is the term applied to a Jbínwar who has taken the pahul as a
Sikh. The word means pure or purifier and the Sodiá is employed as
a cleaner of utensils. Sikh Jhíwars are also employed as jhatkais or
butchers who slaughter by jhatká ; and in Sikh regiments they work
as bakers (lángrís).
We may thus regard the Jhínwar as par excellence the drawer of
water and palanquin-bearer of the Hindu community, and Panihárs and
Kahár as synonyms of the caste, as a whole, Sodiá being restricted to
the Sikh Jhínwars.
But the Jhínwar has many other occupations. His association with
water confers on him such purity that he can enter any Hindu's kitchen,
even a Brahman's chauka, provided that culinary operations have not
reached the point at which salt is mixed with the food. Nevertheless
Brahmans, Khatris and oven Bánias will not eat kachi food at a Jhín-
war's hands.
But besides cookery the Jbínwar follows almost any occupation con.
nected with water. He is a fisherman, or máchhi, and sometimes a
* Legends of the Punjab-I, 05.
+ The Bángrú exterd into Siálkot.
* Platt gives dhirar, dhimar, as the fisher caste, kahár, a fisherman. He does not
pive jhiwar.



384
Jhinwar occupations.
boatman,* a sinker of wells, chobhá; and in the villages be makes
baskets, mats and fans. Last, but not least, the Jhínwar is a cultiva-
tor, especially of the singhára or water-nut.t
Jhínwar women also follow divers callings. As a pare caste they
parch grain, but they also act as midwives.
Finally, there is a group of Jhínwars called Búria or Búờná,f which
appears to be the same as the Kalbát, Changar or Machhera groap, and
whose members live by extracting oil from animals and practise cup-
ping (singi). This group is looked down upon by the other Jhinwars
and is not allowed intermarriage with them. It thus forms an endo-
gamous sub-caste, if indeed it can be regarded as a branch of the
Jbínwars at all.
Sometimes Saqgás, Machhís, Panjariás, Meos, Chișímárs, Chhanbals,
Bor, Mír Shikárís, Malláhs, Bhațiárás, Pakhiwárás and Gagrás claim
Jhínwar descent, or assert that they are jhínwars because they follow
the same calling, but they have no real connection with the Jhínwar
caste. Similarly, Ghirths, Cbhangs and Bahtís work as water-carriers,
etc., but they are not thereby Jhínwars.
The social grouping of the Jhíwars is nebulous to a degree. One
account divides them into 4 muhins, thus :
1. Máhar.
2, Naſadiá. Forming an endogamous group.
3. Jamoe.
4. Búdnás or Búriá Kachhwáhá.
s Loráhá.
The last, as already mentioned, being excluded from all social inter-
course with Nos. 1-3.
The term Mahr or Mahrá however is applied to all Jhíwars, and it is
generally understood in an honorific sense, though it is also said to
mean effeminate and to be applied to the Jhíwars because they are
employed in domestic service. Parch or headroan is sometirdes apo
plied to them. On the other hand, they are contemptuously termod
Táhlí tap, or servile (?) and Bandar-zát or monkey caste (?)
In Gujrát the Jhíwar claim descent from the (Bárí) Khatris and are
as such called Barhia Jhíwars.
* They are said to have learnt the art of rowing from Manauti, Jhiwar. (Anothor
account says Kálú bhagat was of the Manwauti got).
of When the singháră crop is ripe the family' got is bidden to a feast, the amount spent
being proportioned to the value of the crop and varying from 14 to 54 seers, which quanti.
ty, or its value is given to the chela of Kálá bhagat.
? In Karnál the Búdnás are also said to be called Kanchbi and to worship Lál Gurú, as
well as Kálú bhagat,
& The Jblowars of Panipat ia Karpál have two groups Mábir and Bodne or Kanchhis
which are divided into a number of gots,
I Mahr. H. = mehtar, chief headman, is applied to men of the Rain, Gujar and Jbiwar
castes. In Panjabi it takes the forms mahir and mahirá fom. mahiri. Platta mays
mahrá (an effeminate man) is applied to kahárs because they have access to the women's
apartments.
For panch and mahr in the sense of 'chief' or ' headman' cf. naik, among the
Lobánas.



Jhinwar beliefs.
385
The Cult of Káli Bhagat.
The cult of Kálú bhagat is professed by the Jhínwars in particular,
and by members of a certain number of other castes also. Báwá Kálú
was by caste & Hindu Jhíwar, of the Manauti got, born at Barial near
Hariána in Hoshiarpur and buried at Panch Nangal in the same tuhsil.
His temple, however, lies in Pánchhat, in the Kapurthala State. Of
his two sons Ganesha and Mahesha the latter alone left issue, so his
descendants, who are styled Báwás, live in the three above places and
in Khutiar and Kahnpar also. They receive presents from the Hindu
Jhíwars, as well as from some Sáhni Játs, Chuhrás and Chamárs.
Various stories are told of Kálú's origin. According to one Parbati
made a clay image of a boy and gave it life, leaving it near a well
Two women, a Brahmani and & Jhíwarí, came to draw water, and each
claimed the child. The village elders decided that it belonged to her
from whose breasts milk flowed, and the Jhíwarí fulfilled this test.
She named her child Kálú or 'the dark one.' As a boy Kálú was
employed as a cowherd, and a sádhu bade him milk an ox, which he
did successfully. In remembrance the sádhr gave him his gudri
(quilt) which conferred on him omniscience. Thin Kálú wandered over
the world until he came to Panch Nangal, where he died, and there
his gudri and sandals (pavve) are preserved.
Kálú left four* disciples--Lachhmí Chand, Srí Chand, Megh Chand
and Tára Chand, from among whose descendants a priest is elected by
divination.t He makes visitations to his followers, going every year
or two to every part of the Province, and collecting alms. Each panchá-
yat gives him Re. 1-4, and in return he bestows four cardamoms,
and a red and blue thread (Ganga-jamni-dhiga) at every mat.
This thread is worn tied round the neck. Females are not pernitted
to assume this thread, but they and the Jhíwar children of both sexes
wear the kanthi, a necklace of black wool and cotton.
"He who chooses the life of an ascetic,'-says Kálú - of him both
his enemy and his king are afraid.'
Another version is that Kálú was a Rájputt who lived in Hastinapur.
Once he was catching fish on the bank of the Junpá against the order
of the king, and seeing the king with his retinue coming towards him
from a distance and being afraid, he threw his net, etc., into the river,
rubbed earth on his body, so as to look like a faqir, closed his eyes and
sat down near the bank of the river. As the king with his officials
passed by, he supposed Kálú to be a faqir and threw some money to
him. When the king had passed by, Kálú opened his eyes and saw
the money, and was so much impressed by the incident that he
remained a faqir till the end of his days, and spent the rest of his life as
* Some add a fifth-Kánh Chand.
† All the available persons are invited to a feast, and dishes (chiefly of rice) are set
before each and covered over with a cloth. After a few minntes the cloths are removed
and he, in whose dish worms are found, is elected. He must remain celibate and eat fruit
only, not grain, except porridge made of singhára flour. He receives all offerings mado
at the sumádh. The idea underlying this rite of divination appears to be that he who has
given up eating grain, and before whom grain turns into worms is the destined priest.
Or a Máhir Jhínwar, says a third version.



886
Jhínwar guilds.
an ascetic at Panchnadgla. He found fishing less profitable than begging
and justly remarked :-
Bánú bará diál dá, tilak chháp (gal) aur mál,
Jam darpe, Kálú kahe, to bhai máne bhopal.
“ The garb of an ascetic, with marks of a sacred order on his person
and a rosary on his neck, is a great thing. (Before it) even the Angel
of Death shrinks back, says Kálú, aod a king is overtaken with fear.”
The Jhínwars in Gurgaon have the following 13* sections :-
1 Borna Kanthewálá.
8 Kalbút (Machhera or Changar).
2 Badhia.
9 Machhera (Kalbút or Changar).
3 Changar (Machhera or Kalbát).
10 Mabar.
4 Oharihar.'
11 Taráha,
5 Dhanwar, a corruption of Dhlawar. 12 Tathi.
6 Dharia.
13 Tulati.
7 Guria.
The Jhínwars of Gurgaon are Kálúbansi of the Boria Kanshíwála
caste which contains 84 groups.
Guild organisation.
Despite its complex and perhaps heterogeneous character, the
Jhínwar caste possesses a fairly strong guild organisation. Thnsin
Jind the caste has a sair or principal chauntra, with subordinate
chauntras. Each chauntra has a chaudhri and two kotwáls as his
assistants with a chobdár, who acts as convener of the panchayat. In
Rohtak district there are 6 Jhínwar thappas or jurisdictions which are
apparently subordinate to the chauntra at Rohtak itself, and in that
town lives the chaudhri who has 84 villages under his control. Each
village sends sardárs or panch as its representatives to the chauntra.
Delhi is the great centre of the Jhínwar guild in the south-east Panjab.
Other accounts make the panch synonymous with the chaudhri and
the organisation is doubtless as loose and elastic as such organisations
usually are, though its strength is indisputable. The office of chaudhra
is hereditary, as a rule, but if the successor is deemed incompetent
election is resorted to. A chaudhri gives lág on ceremonial occasions.
receiving double bháji...
In Sialkot the chaudhri or panch receives a turban and some money
at festive gatherings. He has under him a kotwal or messe
under him a kotwal or messenger, and
bedhaks or singers, who sing on such occasions.
The Dhinwars have already been noticed, but fuller information as to
their organisation is bere given, In. Gurgaon they are locally called
Mallahs or Thanterias, from their largest village, Thanteri : they are.
however, found on the banks of the Jumna as far down as Agra and
are three groups--the Bharbhúnjas, those who live by service as
water-carriers, and the pilfering section who are called Thagaras Thor
appear to have three tribes -- Sakkrawal, I from Rákota in A gra. Dewal
and Nadma, in Gurgaon. The Dhínwar gots are very numerous and
is with such as the charud hari
+ Of these Nos. 1, 10 and 11 can smoke together but not intermarry.
+ The Jhinwars hold musical reunions at which their well-known wárs are sung. These
his describe Akbar's dealings with tho Rajputs and their heroes' prowess. The song
of Jaimaland Fatah is the most famous of these wárs.
'+ Thanteri formerly belonged to a race called Paroki, but they abandoned it. It was
granted to Harpál, leader of the Sakkarwal, 580 years ago, but the Malbhs own no land
in it now.



887
Jhonjah--Jodh.
include such names as Jaislán, Túnwar, Jádhún, Gaur, Punwár, Badiá,
Badgujar, Jadbansi, Chirimar, Dikhat, Chán, Morathia, Najár, Ramandos,
Dhanu, Mihránia, Besli, Chhataiya, Bharáya, Ganglina, Dholána.
Baisla, Sakráwan, Chauharma, etc., in Gurgáon, and Chauhan, Dhankar
and Jhánga, from Muttra, etc.
JHONJAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JÆOON, see under Pacheda.
Jhor, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán and Amritsar.
JHOȚAA', a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JHUJI, (1) an agricultural clan found in Shahpur ; (2) a Mubammadan Ját
clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JAOLLAN, an agricultural tribe found in Baháwalpur. They claim descent
from Rai Gájun, and pay dán or nazar to their chief. The Drighs are
said to be akin to the Jhullar, but others say they are a Bhatti sept.
JHUMMAT, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Shábpur.
JAUMRIÁLA, lit. “ family servant," a term applied in Chambá to any tenant
who rents land in cash or kind,
JAUNJH, a tribe in Baháwalpur which claims to be a branch of the Janjuhas
though others say they are Bhattis. They have three septs : Gasúra,
Ghakbkhar and Tanwari.
JILDI, see under Ulamá.
JINDEKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JindwÁLI, a sept of Rajputs descended from Mának Chand, son of Sangar
Chand, 16th Rájá of Kahlúr.
JISTKÁNI, formerly a powerful tribe in the Sindh Ságar Doáb, with head.
quarters at Mankera and still numerous there. They take brides from
the Lasháris, of whom they are believed io be a branch Found also as
a clan in the Gurcháni and Dríshak tribes. Mackenzie salls them
Jaskáni and says they have 10 septs.*
Jo, (1) vulg. Thákur.–A title applied in Láhul to the noble families which
rank with the Nonos of Spiti and the old ruling family of Ladákh.
The Jos of Barthog in Láhul frequently marry princesses of that family,
a privilege bestowed on them because, when the Kullú Rájás attempted
to wrench Láhul from Ladakh, they remained true to their allegiance.
Like the Nonos of Spiti the Jos of Láhul cannot always find husbands
for their own daughters, and so some of the minor Jo families have
begun to sell their girls to ordinary Kanet families in the Kullú
valley, the climate of which is very trying in summer to ladies born
and bred in Láhul. On the other hand, the Jos have begun to inarry
Kullú womep. (2) a Ját sept without whose nominal leave the Mair
chaudhrís of Kot Khilán in Jhelum cannot give a girl in marriage.
Jooho, fem. JO-JO, Tib., the son-in-law of a high-class family, in Spiţi : see
Chahzang.
JODH, súe under Japjúa. The Júd of Babar's time, the Jodk still hold a
fow villages in the Chakwal tahsil of Jhelum and claim Janjúa descent.
* Jaskáni, Sargáni, Múráni, Shaháni, Mandráni, Momdáni, Kandáni, Lashkaráni,
KUPOHÁNI and Ma.liáni : Capt. Hector Mackenzie, Leia and Bukker Sett. Rep., 1865, p. 23,
For their history see under Mirráni,



888
Jodha-Jogi.
JODVÁ, JODAH, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JODARA, JODRA, a Rájput tribe of the Attock District, where it holds the
south-east of Pindigheb tahsil, owning a little less than a third of its
cultivated area and paying more than a third of its revenue.
It is said to have come from Jammu or, according to another story,
from Hindustan and to have held its present tract before the GAEBA
sattled alongside of them. The Jodhras' eponyin was, they say, converted
by Mahmúd of Ghazni, yet they still retain traces of Hindu customs
in their festivals and ceremonies. They appear to have come to the
District about the end of the 16th century, and possessed themselves
of the Soán and Sil ilágas which, with much of Tallagang tahsil,
they ruled from Pindi Gheb.* They found Awáns in possession of the
soil and retained them as tenants. Malik Aulia Khán was the firet
Jodhra Malik of any importance known to history. Under the
Mughals he held Pindi Gheb, Tallagang and parts of Chakwal and
Fatehjang tahsils as revenue assignee and he probably it was who over-
ran Tallagang. The Sikhs found the Jodhra power at its zenith, but it
rapidly decayed owing to the secession of important branches of the
tribe and the rise of the Ghebas. The tradition that the Gheba is really
a branch of the Jodbra is supported by the fact that the town of Pindi
Gheb is held by the Jodbra, not by the Gheba. Cracroft described
them as “fine spirited fellows who delight in field sports, have horses
and hawks, are often brawlers, and are ever ready to turn out and fight
out their grievances, formerly with swords, and now with the more
humble weapons of sticks and stones.” Tha Maliks of Pindi Gheb are
the leading Jodhra family.*
Jods), see Jotsi. Jodsi is the form used in Láhul, where the jodsis or
astrologers hold a little land rent-free, called onpo-zing, and could not
apparently now be evicted, however inefficient. The beds or physicians
hold man-zing land on a similar tenure. Cf. Hensi and Lohár.
Joar; fem. Jogin.I-A devotee, a performer of jog. The Yoga system of
philosophy, as established by Patanjali, taught the means whereby the
human soul might attain complete union with the Supreme Being. The
moderu Jogi, speaking generally, claims to bave attained that union
and to be, therefore, a part of the Supremes and, as such, invested with
powers of control over the material universe. The history of the deve.
y Settling originally on the north bank of the Sil the Jodhras founded Pindi Gheb.
then called Dirahti. Later they moved their colony to the south bank of the Sil. Pindi
Gheb was also named Pindi Malika-i-Shahryar and Pindi Malika.i. Aulia, the village of the
royal princess or queen of the saints, according to Raverty.
+ For a detailed account of the Jodhra families see the Attock Gazetteer, 1907, pp. 78-81.
Jogini is a female demon, created by Durgá, a witch or sorceress : see Platt's s. v. The
Yoginis or sorceresses of Hindu mythology may be of a modification of the Yakshinis or
Drvads of Buddhist iconography.-Grünwedel, Buddhist Art in India, p. 111. The jogini
is a sprite common in modern Punjab folklore, especially in the Hills. Thus in Kullu
besides the devtas there are other beings who must from time to time be propitiated, but
who do not generally possess temples. The woods and waterfalls and hill-tops are peopled
by jognis, female spirits of a malignant nature, the gray moss which floats from the branches
of firs and oaks in the higher forests is "the jognis' hair." The jogni of Chul, a peak of the
Jalori ridge, sends hail to destroy the crops if the people of the villages below fail on an
appointed day to make a pilgrimage to the peak and sacrifice sheep.
Pandit Hari Kishen Kaul dissents from this view and would say :-" Some of the modern
Jogis claim supernatural prowess, acquired by practising austerities or by black magic."
The point of the observation in the text is that the practice of austerities or religious
exercises confers, direotly or indirectly, dominion over the material universe.
1



The term Jogi.
389
lopment of the modern Jogi out of the ancient professors of Yoga is as
fascinating as it is obscure, but it would be entirely beyond the scope
of this article, the object of which is to give a matter-of-fact account
of the actual beliefs and customs of the latter-day Jogi.
The term Jogi may be said to include two very distinct classes of
persons. Firse are the Jogís proper, a regular religious order of
Hindus, which includes both the Augha; Jogís and the Kanphatta Jogi
ascetics wio are followers of Gorakh Nath and priests and worshippers
of Shiva * These men are fully as respectable as the Bairágís, Gosáins,
and other religious ordere. They are all Hindus, but the gharishti or
secular Jogi, even if a Hindu, appears to be commonly called RAWAL
and makes a living by begging, telling fortunes, singing and the like.t
Another synonym for the Hindu Jogi is NÁTH. The second class is that
miscellaneous assortment of low-caste faqirs and fortune-tellers, both
Hindu and Musalmán but chiefly Musalman, who are commonly known
as Jogís. Every rascalls beggar who pretends to be able to tell
fortunes, or to practise astrological and necromantic arts in however
small a degree, buys himself a drum aod calls himself, and is called by
others, a Jogi. These men include all the Musalmáns, and probably
a part of the Hindus of the eastern districts, who style themselves Jogís.
They are a thorougbly vagabond set, aud wander about the country
beating a drum and begging, practising surgery and pbysic in a small
way, writing charms, telling fortunes, and practising exorcism and
divination; or, settling in the villages, eke out their earnings from
these occupations by the offerings made at the local shrines of the
malevolent godlings or of the Sayads and other Musalmán saints; for
the Jogi is so impure that he will eat the offerings made at any shrine.
These people, or at least the Musalmán section of them, are called in
the centre of the Punjab Ráwals, or sometimes Jogi-Ráwals, from the
Arabic rammái, a diviner, which again is derived from ramal, “sand,"
with which the Arab magicians divine. The Jogi-Ráwals of Kathiawár
are said to be exorcisers of evil spirits, and to worship a deity called
Koriál. In Sialkot the Jogís pretend to avert storms from the ripening
crops by plunging a drawn sword into the field or a knife into a mound,
sacrificing goats, and accepting suitable offerings. Mr. Benton wrote:
" The Jogi is a favourite character in Hindustani fiction. He there
appears as a jolly playful character of a simple disposition, who enjoys
the fullest liberty and conducts himself in the most eccentric fashion
under the cloak of religion without being called in question.” The
Jogís used to be at deadly feud with the Saniásís and 500 of the former
were once defeaiad by two or three bundred Sadiásís. Akbar wit-
Dessed the fight and sent soldiers 'smeared with ashes to assist the
Saniásís who at length defeated the Jogís.
* It might be more correct to say Bhairava, not Shiva.
† This was Sir Deozil Ibbetson's view, but the Gharishti or Grihasti Jogi is now accurately
described as distinct from the Jogi Ráwal. The latter may be by origin à Jogi, but he is
a degenerate and has now no connection with the Jogis properly so called.
I The derivation of Ráwal from rumal appears quite untenable. The word Ráwal is used
as a title in Rajputána. It means lord or ruler' and is thus merely a synonym of
náth, but appears to be specially affected by Jogis of the Nág. Dathia punth, see infra, p. 390.
$ E. H. I., V, p. 318,



390
Jogi origins.
The Jogís as a body cannot be said to have any history ; so numerous
and indeterminato are the branches into which they have split up in the
course of time. Regarding their origins the Jogís have a vast body of
nebulous tradition, the débris of much primitive metaplıysical specula-
tion now hardly recognisable in its fantastic garb.
The origin of the Jogís.
According to the Tahqiqat-i-Chishti, a devotee of Shiva desired off-
spring, so the god, at Párbati's intercession, gave him some ashes from his
dhúní or fire and told him his wife should eat them. The wife, however,
was incredulous and did not do so, but let the ashes fall on a heap of
cowdang. Eventually the devotee found a child where the ashes had
been thrown, and took it to Shiva, who said it would grow up a great
ascetic and should be given to him.* He named it Gorakh Náth, from the
place of his birth and instructed him to find a Guru. As Shiva could find
no one worthy, Gorakh Náth set forth to seek a teacher, and reaching
the sea, offered there a large loaf on a pípal leaf. This was swallowed
by Rakho, the fish, who 12 years later restored not the loaf, but a child
whom Shiva named Machhendra Náth and who became Gorakh Náth's
Guru. Another version makes Machbendra Náth the issue of Gorakh
Náth himself.
Shiva then told Gorakh Náth that he must, though an ascetic, have
children, and advised him to make disciples. Sbiva also gave him dubh
grass, saying it should be their clothing, and a stick cut from an ak tree,
saying it should be tied to his garments, and used as a nád, to be sounded
thrice daily, in the morning, in the evening, and before the Guru. He
also asked Párbatí to bore Gorakh Náth's ears and place earthen ear-
rings in them. This she did and also mutilated herself, dyeing a cloth
with the blood and giving it to Gorakh Nath to wear. Gorakh Nath
then made twelve disciples :-
1. Sant Náth.
5. Bairág Náth. 1 9. Gangai Náth.
2. Rám Náth.
6. Darya Náth
10, Dhajja Náth.
3. Sharang or Bharang Náth. 7. Káik Náth.
11. Jalandhar Náth.I
4. Dharm Náth.
8. Nág Náth.† 1 12. Ním Náth.
A tradition says that Narinjan Nirankár, the formless Creator,
created Gorakh Nath from the sweat of his breast, whence he is also
called Ghor Náth (fr. ghor, filth). The Supreme then bade him create
the noiverse, whereupon a creeping plant sprang from his navel, and a
lotus blossomed on it. Froin this flower sprang Vishnu, Brahma, Shiva
and Shakti, the last a woman who straightway dived beneath the
waters, before earth or sky, air or fire had been created. As Earth was
indispensable to the complete manifestation of the universe, the Supreme
sent Vishnu down to the lower regions beneath the waters to bring
Earth to the surface. When he reached the Patál Lok Vishnu saw
Shaktí with a dhúné in front of her, while light rayed from her body.
* An instance of a child being devoted to the god from birth. This legend is doubtless
of quite recent origin, made up by ignorant Jogis out of fragments from the Puríinas. No
classical authority is or could be quoted for what follows. It is pure folklore, possibly
ancient but probably modern.
+ Jogis of the Nág.Náthia panth are called Réwals.
Í Jogís of the Jálandhar-Náthia panth are called pú instead of náth.
& Jogis of the Ním-Náthia panth are called Gaphain.



391
Jogi myths.
A Voice asked who had come, and Vishnu replied that his errand was
to bring up Earth by the Supreme's command. The Shaktí answered
that he could do so, provided he first wed her, but Vishnu urged that
intercourse with her was impossible, since even at a distance of 12 kos he
found her effulgence insupportable. So he returned unsuccessful.
Brahma likewise failed, and so at last Shiva was sent. To his reply that
Shiva had come,' the Voice said: “There have been crores of Shivas,
which Shiva art thou ?' Shiva answered that he was the Lord of Kailas,
and he agreed to espouse Shaktí when Earth and Sky had come into
being. Shakti then gave forth the four Vedas, and bestowed two
handfuls of ashes with some smoke from her dhúní upon Shiva, who
carried them up. The smoke when sent upwards became the sky, and
the ashes when strewn upon the waters formed land. Hence the Jogís
worship only Gorakh Náth and Shiva. By a process which reminds us
of the myth of Hephaistos and Athéné,* Gorakh Nath became by a fish
the father of Machhendra Náth, who forthwith went into the wastes to
worship. When Gorakh Nath was reproached with his incontinence he
felt that he must seek out a gurú of his own, but finding none better
than himself, he bethought him that his own son was fitted for the
office and exclaimed:- .
Barte khasm, nikalte puta,
Yún bhákhe Gorakh abhdútá.
« The husband's embraces cause sons to be born': Thus saith the
ascetio Gorakh.”
He then sought out Machhendra Náth, who would have fallen at his
feet, but Gorakh addressed him as his own guru. This is how
Machhendra Náth became Gorakh's gurů as well as his son.
The Brabmans tell quite a different tale: Bhasmasur, a rákshasa,
had long served Shiva, who in return promised him any boon he might
claim, so he demanded that which when placed on anything would
reduce it to ashes. Shiva thereupon gave him his bangle. Bhasmasur
coveted Párbatí, Shiva's wife, and he endeavoured to place the bangle
on her husband's head. Shiva fled, pursued by the demon, and at last
hid in a cave on Kailás and blocked up its entrance with a stone. Bhagwan
now assumed Párbati's form and approached Bhasmasur, but when-
ever he tried to grasp the vision it eluded his embrace, and at last
declared that Shiva used to sing and dance before his wife. Bhasmasur
avowed his readiness to learn and while he was dancing as she taught
him she bade him place his hand on his head. In it he held the
bangle, and was burnt to ashes. Bhagwán then brought Shiva,
who was afraid to show himself, out of the cave. Shiva's curiosity
was now aroused and he demanded that Bhagwan should again assume
the form which had enchanted Bhasmasur. This was Mohni, Párbati's
double, but even more beauteous than she, and when her shape appeared
Shiva by a process similar to that alluded to above became the father
of Hanumán, who was born of Anjali's ear, and of Machhendra
Náth. By a cow he also fathered Gorakh Nath.
Once, says another legend, the søge Bashisht recounted the follow-
ing story to Sri Rám Chandrají :-"My mind was ill at ease, and I
* A. Mommsen : Feste der Stadt Athen, p. 6; and Roscher, Lexikon, s. v. Hephaistos,



392
Jogi myths.
wandered until I came to Bindra Chal, on which hill I spent a long
period in worship. One day I saw the wife of Brahma, my father,
coming towards me. She approached and said my father was wroth
with her and I resolved to go to him, so I went and found a cave
whose mouth was blocked by a stone Unable to move it I created a
man by my Brahmi-tej (creative power) and he removed the stone.
I then entered the cave, wherein I saw a world, like the one in which
I lived. In it were all the gods, and I first made a reverence (parnám)
to Brahma and then to all the other gods. But when I told them
of yny errand they warned me to quit the cave at once, since the
day of judgment was at hand because wives were dissatisfied with
their husbands. I did as they had bidden me, but meanwhile stillness
had prevailed everywhere, and all the earth had turned to water.
Soon a great sound arose from the waters, and endured for a long
while, but when it bad nearly died away Shakti appeared. I
endeavoured to approach her, but could not even do obeisance, and
stood like a statue before her. She then cast a ball into the
waters, and it made a great sound. As it died away she again appear.
ed. Thrice she did this, and the third time Vishnu appeared.
Him she bade to wed her, but he refused and again she threw a ball
upon the waters. Then Brahma emerged, but he too declined her
hand, and again she cast a ball. Shiva then appeared in wrathful
mood, and he promised to espouse her, but not yet. Though all
these gods were free from máyá, nevertheless through it they had
appeared, and each claimed superiority over the others. Meanwhile
a lotus blossomed on the surface of the waters, and they agreed that
he who should trace it to its root should be deemed the chief.
Neither Vishnu nor Brahma succeeded in his attempt, but Shiva,
leaving his body, transformed himself into an insect and descended
through the stem of the lotus. But his rivals besought Shaktí to
transfigure his body, so as to puzzle him on his return, and so she
took some dirt off her body and of it made earrings (kundal).
These she placed in the ears of Shiva's form, boring holes in them,
and thus re-animated the body. When it stood up she demanded
fulfilment of Shiva's promise, but his form refused to wed her,
so in her wrath she threatened to burn it. The body, however,
replied that her earringe had made him immortal. Subsequently the
earrings were changed into mundras, as will be told later on. The
Shakti then asked whose body it was, and it replied that it was
Bhogu-rikh, whereby Jogís mean one who is immortal and has control
over his senses. Hence Shiva is also called Bhogu-rikh.
Meanwhile Shiva returned, having traced the lotus to its root.
Failing to find his own form he made for himself a new body* and
in that married Shaktí. The descendants of the pair were callei.
Rudargan, those of Bhogu-rikh being named Jogijan. But Shiva's
progeny inherited his fierce temper, and eventually exterminated
the descendants of Bhogu-rikh, who told Shiva that he, as a jogi,
was free from joy or sorrow and was unconcerned at the quarrel
between their children. But Shiva replied: "Thou art free from
máyá, yet dost owe thy existence to it. Do thy work, I will not
* The Jogís, it is said, do not admit that Shiva thus created a second body.



A Jogi spiritual pedigree.
393
interfere.' So Bhogu-rikh began his task under Shiva's counsel.
Initiated by him he became known as Ude Náth Párbati* and founded
the Jogi panth or 'door.' (Bashisht's tale would seem to end here).
The following is a table of his spiritual descendants :-
Shakti.
Shiva Ji.
Ude Náth Párbati,
The second of the 9 Náths and founder of the panth of the Jogis.
Rudargan.
Jálandhar.
Machhendar Náth.
Jalandhari.
Gorakh Náth.
-
Ním Náth
Sirtors.
Páras Náth
Puj.
Bhartari Kanipa.
Nath.
Sidh Shangari.
Pangal or
Arjan Nanga.
Kapal Muni. Kharkai. Bhuskai. Shakar Sat Náth. Santokh Lachhman
Nath.
| Nath. | Nath.
. Dharm
Ajai Pal. Ganga Náth. Hándi Pharang. Náth. Rám Náth.
After his initiation by Shiva Ude Náth made Rudargan a jogi
and he by his spiritual power, initiated an evil spirit (dait) named
Jalandhar, bringing him to the right way. He, in turn, made two
disciples, Machhendra Náth and Jallandaripá. The latter founded
the Pá panth; while Machhendra Nath made Gorakh Nath his
disciple." And here we must tell the story of Machhendra Náth's
birth.
In the Satyug lived a Rája, Udho-dhar, who was exceedingly pious.
On his death his body was burnt, but his navel did not burn, and the
unburnt part was cast into a river, where a fish devoured
it and gave birth to Machhendra Nátht-from machhi, "fish.' By
reason of his good deeds in a previous life he became a saint. Gorakh
Náth was born of dung, and when Machhendra Náth found him he
made him his disciple, and then left him to continue his wanderings.
At leogth Machhendra Náth reached Sangaldíp where he became a
householder, I killed the Rája and entered his body. He begat two
sons, Páras Náth and Ním Náth. Rája Gopi Chands of Ujjain was
* Lit. Noble lord (náth) of the mountain (púrbati).
+ Matsyendra.
I Grihisht ashram. In other words he rolapsed and abandoned the spiritual life. This
appears more clearly in the following variant of the legend :-After making Gorakh his
disciple Machhendra went off to Kámrúp-not to Sangaldíp-and there he found the
country governed by two Rápis, who with magic aids chose themselves husbands. When
Macbbendra arrived he too fell into their toils and lost his reason, so the Ránís wedded
him and posted watchmen to prevent apy mendicants entering the kingdong to effect his
rescue. Gopi Chand, however, succeeds in evading them, as will be described later.
§ The variant makes Gopi Chand sister's sor of Bhartari, and his mother tries to make
him a disciple of Jálandhar Náth, but instead he casts that saint into a well.



894
Ujjain was there his bathing: plathe kitchen of then this
bearing he took foomust be Gorakilaing, and the aishat
Jogi legends.
taught yog by his mother, and desiring to become a jogi sought out
Jallandaripa, who taught him a certain maxim (shabd). Unable to
understand this, he consulted his minister who falsely told him that
its teaching was contrary to the Vedas and true religion, fearing that
if he disclosed its real import, the Rájá would abandon his kioydown
and retire from the world. Hearing this false interpretation Gopi
Chand had Jallandaripá cast into a well, into which he ordered horse-
dung to be thrown daily. There he remained, until Gorakh Náth,
resolved on his rescue, reached Ujjain. The seat of Jallandaripá at
Ujjain was then occupied by Kanípa, the mahant. Gorakh Náth chose
a lonely spot for his bathing place and thither, according to Jogi
usage, food was sent him from the kitchen of the monastery by the
hands of a man who was not himself a Jogi. When this messenger,
bearing food for one, reached Gorakh Nath he found two persons:
a hen he took food for two, he found four, and so on. Hearing this
Kanípa guessed it must be Gorakh, so he sent him a taunting message,
saying: 'Thy gurú is but a worldling, and thou canst not free him.'
But Gorakh retorted that Kanípa ought to be ashamed to let his gurú
remain so buried in the well. Upon this Kanípa, with the Rájá's
leave, began to clear the well, but Gorakh declared that the horse.
dung should ever increase, and left for Sangaldíp.* .
On arriving there, however, he found that the Rája had posted men
to turn back any jogi trying to enter his kingdom, so be turned
himself into a fly, and thus succeeded in entering the Rájá's court.
There he caused all the instruments and the very walls to chant,
"Awake, Machhendra, Gorakh Nath has come.' The Rájá bade him
show himself, and he appeared before him among the musicians.
(There is clearly a gap in the recorded legend here.f It continues :-)
The Rája's queen died, and, after her death, Gorakh asked Machhendra
to come away with him. On the way, after a repulsive incident,
Gorakh killed Machhendra's two sons and placed their skins on a
tree. When Machhendra asked where the boys were, Gorakh
showed him their skins, and then to comfort himn restored them to life.
Further on their road they were sent to beg in a village, where a man
bade them drag away a dead calf, before he would give them almg.
They did so and in return he gave them food, but when they reached
Machhendra and Gorakh again they found it had turned to blood and
worms. So Machhendra cursed the villagef and when the people
* Kámrúp in the variant. On the road he meets a troupe of actors (rásdhdrís) on their
way to Kámrúp, and is engaged by them as a servant. Bidden to carry all their“ stage
properties he bears the whole burden by his spiritual power. On their arrival the
rúsiháris perform before Machhendra but not one of them was able to play on the tabla,
as Gorakh lield it spell-bound, and they had to get him to play it. As soon as it began to
play, it rang · Awake! Machhendra!' Rásdháris are found in Lahore and Amritsar and
the adjoining Districts They are said to be called bhagats, like worshippers of the Devi.
† The variant too is silent on this episode. It makes the two Ránís transform them.
selves into kites and pursued them for a while, oft compelling them to stop, but at last they
escaped from Kámráp. As soon as they had got out of the country they halted by a well,
into which Gorakh threw four gold bricks and as many gold coins, which Machhendra had
brought from Kámrúp, and this so enraged the latter that he refused to go further. So
Gorakh turned the water into gold, but Machhendra thinking this would cause disputes
among the worldly, begged him to block up the well. Gorakh then turned the gold into
crystal, the first ever created,
A particular rite.



395
Jogi legends.
asked him to visit them he promised to do so in the Kaljug (Iron
Age).* Páras Náth and Ním Náth then separated, and each founded
& new panth, the Púj and the Sartora, with which other jogís have no
conceid. Gorakh and Machhendra now reached Ujjain, aud found Jal.
landaripá still buried in the well. With Kanípa they rescued him,
turning all the horse-dung into locusts which flew away, and, when only
a little was left, forming a human body with a blanket and infusing life
into it: this man they bade bring the Náth out of the dung.t The man
asked him to come out and give him bread, but the Báwá (saint
Jallandarípa) asked who he was. He replied Gopi Chand,' and the
saint thereupon burnt him to ashes seven times. But at the eighth
time Gorakh asked Rájá Gopi Chand to go himself to the saint.
Jallandarípa then consented to come out, and declared that since he
had not been consumed by fire, he should become immortal, and this
is why Gopi Chand never dies. I He was also made a Jogi by Kanípa,
with the saint's permission, and assumed the name of Sidh Sanskaripá,
one of the 84 sidhs. The Jogis of this panth are called spádhá, as
they keep snakes. They are generally found in Bengal. One of them
initiated Ismail, a Muhammadan into tho panth, and he founded a new
panth like that of Sidh Sanskaripá.si
Gorakh and Machhendra now left Ujjain and came towards the
Jhelum. There they took up their abode on the hill of Tilla. Here
they initiated the following as Jogís :-(1) Kapal Muniji, who in turn
had two chelas, one Ajai.pal, who founded the Kapalání panth ; the
other Ganga Náth who established the panth called after his own
namell: (ii) Kharkai and Bhuskai, each of whom founded a panth :
(iii) Shakar Náth. The last named in his wanderings reached à land
where a Mlechh (low caste) Rájá bore sway. By him the Jogi was
seized and promised his liberty only if he would cause it to rain
sugar, otherwise he would be put to the torture. But he induced the
Rájá to promise to become his servant if he performed this miracle.
He succeeded, and then seizing the Rájá buried him in the ground.
Twelve years later he returned, and found the Rájá a skeleton, but he
restored him to life and made him his disciple and cook. Nevertheless
the Rájá’s disposition was unchanged, and one day he took out some
of the pulse he was cooking and tasted it. Bhairon chanced that
day to appear in person, ** but he refused the proffered food and the
* In the variant this episode is different: Gorakh goes with the boys to beg alms at a
bania's (merchant's) house, and they are made to take away the dead calf. When Gorakh
sees their food transformed he catches them by the hand, takes them to the bánia's house
and there murders them. Thereupon all the Bánias complain that he has polluted their
jag (sacrifico) by this murder, and he retorts that they had polluted his chelas, but he agrees
to restore them to life if the bánias will henceforth worship him and no other.
They assented, and this is why Gorakh left Páras Náth, one of the two boys, with the
Bánias, among whom the Jains deem him an incarnation of God.
† In the variant Gorakh makes seven bundles of grass, each of which says: “I am Gopi
Chand," in reply to Jálandhar Náth, and is burnt to ashes at his command.
# In the variant the slabs of the well were turned into kites, and the horse-dung into
locusts and so they were created.
$ So Gopi Chand also founded a panth, that called after his second name, viz., Sidh
Sapskaripá. See also infra p. 407.
D'A Jogi of this panth in turn founded the Kajan or Kayan-náthi panth, found in the
ancient town of Bhera on the Jhelum. This must be the Káya-Náthi panth.
According to the doctrine of the panth the food thus became leavings' (júth).
When fool is cooked, Jogis first offer it to Bhairon.



96
The Jogi Nath.
ex-Rájá's villainy was detected. As a punishment a hándi or earthen
pot was hung round his neck and he was condemned to wander the
livelong day getting his food out of the pot. His punishment lasted
four years, and he was then pardoned, but his disciples were called
Hándí-pharang and the panth still bears that name : (iv) Another
initiate was Sant Náth, whose disciple Dharm Náth founded the
Dharn-náthi panth, which now has its head gaddi on the Godáwari,
having replaced the Rámke panth there : (0) Tbe next initiate,
Santokh Náth, made one Rám Náth his chela, and he founded the
Rán-ke panth which, replaced on the Godáwari by the Dharm-páthi,
now has its chief gaddi at Delhi: (vi) Lachhman Náth succeeded
Gorakh at Tilla, and his panth is styled Darbári Tilla Bál Gondai.
Subsequently was born a Jogi who founded a panth called the Sunebri
Tilla, a famous order: (vii) Arjan Nánga, whose seat is near
· Jwalamukhí, founded the Man Manthi panth, or ecstatics, now settled
at Bhar. If a faqir goes to the mahant of this panth be is given
a hoe and some cord and told to go and cut grass. A long time ago
one Sant Náth mahátmá of the Dharm-nathis went to this mahant
and was bidden to cut grass like any one else. So he asked whether
he was to cut the grass from below or from above. He vas told by
a mahátmi that he should 80 cut it that it would grow again.
Accordingly ever since then when a chela is initiated into this ecstatic
panth a guru dies. Sant Náthji's panth is called the Báwájí ké panth.
He had many chelas, of whom two deserve mention. These were
Ranbudh and Mahnidátá. Once as the Báwá wandered porth his
cainels were stolen and when he told the people of that part that he
was their pír or spiritual guide, they replied that he must eat with
them. When the meal was ready he bude these two dieciples eat with
the people, promising them immortality, bnt forbidding them to found
any more new panths. So they did not do so, and are called Nángás,
and to this day two persons always remain in attendance at their
tombs.
One account says that Sharang or Shring Náth, who attained to the
zenith of spiritual power after Gorakh Nath's death, introduced new
rules of his own and bade bis followers bore their ears and wear the
mundra of wood. After his death the following sects or orders were
formed-(1) the Giri Náth, who marry and indulge in such luxuries as
drinking, (2) the Purináma, some of whom are secular and eat
meat, (3) the Saniásis, (4) the militant Nángas, (5) the Ajaipál
whose founder was ruler of Ajmere and a profouod believer in the ear.
pierced Jogis. His followers are said to have once ruled India. (6)
the Gwali-básda, (7) the Ismail Jogis one follower of Ismail was
Nona Chamári, a famous professor of the black art; (8) Agam Náth,
(9) Ním Náth, and (10) Jálandhar Náth.
here and have once we left Ismai nuo tiene
The mythology of Gorakh.
The nine Náths and the 84 Sidhs always follow Gorakh in his
wanderings, and the route can be traced by the small trees bearing
sugarcandy which spring up wherever they go. It is related in the
Bhagvat that Rájá Sambhú Manú once ruled in Oudh over the whole
world. When the four mid-born sons of Brahma refused to beget off-



and Sid lhs.
397
spring, Brahma wept and a tear fell to the earth, whence sprang
Sambhú. His descendants were
Sambhú Manú (Swáyambhuva, the self-existent).
Uthán Pád.
Piya Barat.
Dhruva, the ascetic.
Agnidhar.
Nábhí.
Rakh Bhádeo or Rikháva (Rishábha).*
Bharat and '99 others.
Bharat with eight of his brothers ruled the 9 divisions (khandás) of
the world : 81 became ascetics and Brahmans, and 9 became the Náths
or perfected Jogís, whose names are given below.
The Náths are always said to be nine in number, in contradistinction
to the panths which are, ideally, twelve. Their pames and titles are
variously given :-
1, Aungkár Adi-náth (Lord of Lords), 1 5. Gajbali Gajkanth-náth (Lord of the
Shiva,
Eleplant's Strength and Neck): Ganesa
3. Shel-math (I.ord of the Arrow-shaft): Gaja-karda, elephant.eared, in Sanskrit
variously said to be Krishna or Rám / 6. Praj-náth, or Udaí-náth (Lord of the
Chandra.
People): said to be Párvati.
Santokh.náth (Lord of Gratification). 17. Máyárápí Machhendra-náth (the won.
Achalachambu-náth (Lord of wondrous drous Form) : gurú of Gorakh.
Immoveatility): variously said to be 8. Gathepinde Richayakari or Naranthar:
Honumán or Lakshmana.
Shambujaiti Guru Gorakh-náth.
9. Gyánsarúpe (or Purakh) Siddh Chauranjwe-náth, or Púran bhagat.t
Gorakh plays a leading part in the legend of Gúga, and naturally
therefore Jogís, both Hindu and Muhammadan, take offerings made
to him, giving but a small share to the Chubras; and also carry his
Hag, chhari, of peacock's feathers, from house to house in Bhadon. I
The Sidhs, more correctly Siddhs, are properly speaking saints of
exceptional purity of life wbo have attained to a semi-divine existence,
but who in the eyes of the vulgar are perhaps little more than demons
who obtained power from Gorakh. They are especially worshipped in
The low bilis, se.g. in Ambála and Hoshiarpur, in the form of stones, etc.,
and under various names. The distinctive emblem of their cult appears
to be the singi, a cylindrical ornament worn on a thread round the
neck. Gházíjás is a Siddh of some repute near Una : Chánu is said to
have been a Chamár, and people of that caste feast on goat's flesh and
sing on certain dates to his memory. Another Siddh is the jațhera, or
ancestor, Kála Pír, who is worshipped in the low hills and throughout the
eastern Districts generally and more particularly, as Kála Mabar, by the
Sindhu Játs as their forebear. His shrine is at Mahar in Samrála but
the Sindhus of Kbot in Jind have there set up a shrine with bricks from
the original tomb and there they, and the Khátis and Lohárs too,
* The Jain,
† 800 P. N. Q., II, § 279.
P. N. Q., I, § 3.
Not an inappropriate tract if we regard Shiva as the great hill god and the Siddhs 18
omanations from him through Gorakh.



398
The Jogi earrings.
worship him. His shrine usually takes the form of a mod-pillar under
a tree or by a pond, and images of him are worn in silver plater as
charms. His samadh at Khot is in charge of the Ai-panth Jogís.
The mundra.-How the kundal was turned into a mundra is
explained in the following story :-When Bhartari was made a Jogi
he was put to a severe test. Jallandaripá was his gurú, but he was
also a sádiq or pupil of Gorakh, and his chief companions were of
the Kaplání panth, whence he was known as Bhartari Kapláni and
reckoned one of the 84 sidhs. One day he said to Jallandaripá :
“ Thou hast put me to a severe test, but henceforth the faqirs of this
panth will be mostly men of the world for they will mingle with such
men." Gorakh said that he would be the more pleased with them, and
Bhartari asked for some mark to be given them to distinguish them
from worldly people. Accordingly a hole three inches wide was made
in the Jogi's ears, and clay mundras were inserted in them. Sub-
sequently the mundras were made of wood, then of crystal gilt, then
of ivory. By wearing the mundras, a Jogi becomes immortal, as
Bhogu-rikh had told Shaktí. When this practice was permitted, two
sidhs Kharkai and Bhuskai began to bore each Jogi's ears with
Gorakh's assent. The latter with these two sidhs and several other
Jogís settled at a place on the road to Hinglaj in Balochistán, a place
which every Jogi of this panth must visit if he wishes to be considered
a perfect sådhu and attain yoga. Since then it has been usual to bore
a Jogí's ears, but once when the two sidhs tried to bore the ears of a
Jogi who had visited that place they found that they healed as fast
as they bored holes in them, so they gave up the attempt, and Gorakh
exclaimed that the pilgrim was Aughar.' Thenceforth Aughars
do not have their ears bored and form a body distinct from the other
Jogís.
Jogi Nature-worship.
The Jogís claim, inter alia, power to transmute any metal into gold
or silver. In the time of Altamsh, says one legend, a Jogi named
Dína Náth begged a boy sitting in a shop with a heap of copper coin to
give him a few pieces. The boy said the money was not his, but his
lather's, and he gave the Jogi food. The Jogi prayed to Vishnu for
power to reward the boy. Then he melted down the copper and
turned the mass into gold by means of charms and a powder. "Altamsh
heard of the occurrence and witnessed the Jogi's powers, but the latter
declined to accept any of the gold he had made. so it was sent to the
mint and coined, with his pame as well as that of Altamsh upon it.
Jogís allege that these 'Dínanáthí 'gold mohars are still to be found.
Similarly the Jogís claim power over hailstorms, and in Siálkot the
rathbana* is a Jogi who can check a hailstorm or divert it into
waste land.
The connection between Jogis and snake-worship is naturally a
close one. In some places Jogís are said to eat spakes a kind of
ritualistic cannibalism and the snake is often styled jogi, just as the
parrot is designated pandit.'t.
* Pt. rath, 'hail,' and bana, one who imprisons or chocks.' This practice is alluded
to in Prinsop's Sialkot Settlement Rep., p. 37.
† P. N. Q., II, § 246



Jogi rites.
399
The cults of the Jogís contain strong elements of nature-worship
which finds expression in the names assumed by them after initiation.
Such are Ním-náth,* Kanak-náth (wheat), Nág-náth (snake), Tota-váth
(parrot).
The Jogís hold everything made of earth in great respect, wheace
the saying:–Mitta ki asam, mitti ka báoan, mitti ká sanhana, mitti lá
bána. The earthen ásan (carpet), the earthen pitcher, the earthen
pillow and the earthen woof.'
The Jogi Janeu.
The Jogís generally wear a janeo of black wool, which is made by
certain members of the order, not by any member, nor by a Brahman).
It is 9 cubits long, made of 3 strands each, woven of 8 threads on a
bobbin, and plaited into a bobbin-thread, like an English braid neck-
lace.t Round the waist Jogís wear a similar thread of 2 separate
bobbin-threads of 8 strands each, twisted together, with a loop at
one end and a button at the other.
The Kanphatta should be branded at Kalesar near Dwárká with two
concentric circles within a third incomplete one, both ends of which are
finished off by a circular bund in the arm. I
The rudrakshas with two facets is sacred to Shiva, and can only be
worn by the Jogi who has his wife with him: One with 5 facets is
devoted to Hanumán ; and one with 11 is highly prized, being sacred to
Gauri Shankar and worn by celibate Jogís.
The Jogi funeral rites.
A dying Jogi is made to sit cross-legged. After death the corpse is
washed by the deceased's fellow-Jogís, a langoti tied round its waist
and ashes smeared over it. A coffin is then made, if means permit,
but a poor Jogi is simply wrapped in a blanket and carried by two
men on two poles, and the body thrown into a river. A wealthy Jogi
is, however, placed on a wooden chauki shaped like a palanquin, and
upon this flowers are cast. The procession to the grave is called
sawári and is headed by horses and bands playing music. The grave
is made deep with a spacious niche like that in Muhammadan graves,
and the body placed in it cross-legged and facing the north. The
Jogi's bairágan is placed before him, with a gourd full of water on
his right, a loin-cloth, a kanak or staff of Mahadeo, a loaf of wheaten
flour, and two earthen plates, one full of water, the other of rice and
milk. An earthen potsherd is also placed on his bead. Then a mound
* At P. N. Q., II, 562, it is noted that the chela gets a flower or plant-name for life;
but animal.names appear to be also adopted.
† To the janeo is attached & circlet of horn (rhinoceros it should be), and to this is at.
tached the nád or whistle, which makes a noise like a conch, but not so loud : P. N. Q.,
II, 126.
| P.N. Q., II, 345.
& Beads made of the seed of the badar or jujube.-P. N. Q., II, 558.
|| But Jogis arr, said to bury their dead facing the east ; Saniásis east or north-east,
P. N. Q.; II, 197 In the Simla hills the Jogis were originally mendicants, but have now
become householders . They burn the dead, and for every corpse get 4_annas in moudy,
together with a plate of brass or kansi and a woollen or cotton cloth. They also get some
grain at each. harrast. They are considered defiled as they take offerings made at death,
and tho Ķemets and higher castes will not drink with them.



400
Jogi initiation.
is raised overthe grave,* and all the Jogís wash their hands with water
supplied by the deceased's disciples. They then bathe and the dis-
ciples give them sweets. On the third day they are also fed (chúrma
alone being given if the disciples are poor). Later on the shradh is,
if possible, performed thus:-Jogís are invited and keep a vigil all
night. About a pahr before dawn they are fed with fisb, or pakauras
(vegetables coated with baisan or paste of powdered gram friad in
mustard oil), or khír, i. e. rice boiled in milk, gram and ghungnián, or
piláo, or rice, wine, flesh, fruit, etc. Seven thrones or gaddis are now
erected to: (i) the Pír, (ii) Jogoís, (iii) Sakhya or witness, (iv) Bir,
(v; the Bhandári of Guru Gorakh Náth, (vi) Guru Gorakh Nath, and
(vii) to Neka. Mantras are then repeated, and clothes: gold, silver and
copper : a cow and earth given away in charity. The wake is now
attended only by Jogís but formerly men of all classes, even Muham.
madans, used to take part in it. Lastly, after all these ceremonies, a
council (pindhára) of Jogís is held, and one of the deceased's disciples
is elected Guru or Bir Mahant, three kinds of food, puri, kachauri and
piláo being distributed. The deceased's clothes and the coffin are
given to the kotwáls, or bankias, or else to Jangam faqirs. As the Jogi
is not burnt his bones cannot be sent to the Ganges, so his nails are
removed and taken to Hardwar. The samádh of a Jogi may be of
earth or brick, and belpattar (leaves) are strewn over it. On it a lamp
is also kept burning for 10 days, flowers and water being placed near
it and a conch being blown. Rice balls are given in the name of the
deceased for 10 days as among other Hindus. On the 10th day clothes
are washed and on the 13th kirya karam ceremony is performed. The
ceremonies are the same as among Hindus.
The following story is told to account for the fact that Jogis bury
their dead: In Gorakh's time there arose a dispute between the
Hindus and the Muhammadans, the latter saying they were masters
of the earth and of all the living and the dead. Gorakh sat on the
ground, placing all his food, etc., by his side, and bade the earth yield
to him, if he too bad a share in it. It opened and Gorakh sank into it,
and so Jogis usually bury their dead.
Initiation.
In theory any Hindu can become a Jogi, but in practice only those of
the twice-born castes are admitted into the order. In theory caste is
abandoned upon entering it, and as marriage is, in theory, forbiddeo,
no question as to caste can arise in connection with it. But as mar-
riage is in practice tolerated the original caste is preserved in practice
for matrimonial purposes, though in theory all Jogis are caste-less.
Further, there is a tendency to avoid marriage in the same panth,
as all the members of a panth are in theory spiritually akin.
Within the order there is in theory equality and no restrictions are
placed upon eating, drinking or smoking together, but even a Hindu
of high caste who joins the panth of Jálandhar Náth is excluded by
other panths. Moreover, the theoretical equality does not extend to
the women, as the Jogi does not allow his women-folk to eat with him.
Women of every panth may, however, eat together.
8, 10 a To are in ality and bat even cluded by the
* Over the grave an earthen potsherd is also placed on a three-loggod atool.



Jogi initiation.
401
A would-be disciple is dissuaded from becoming a Jogi, the hardships
of the life being impressed upon him. If he persists he is made to fast
for two or three days. After this, a knife is driven into the earth and
the novice is made to swear by it-
(2) not to engage in trade;
(ii) not to take employment;
(iii) not to keep dangerous weapons ;
(iv) not to become angry when abused ; and
(v) not to marry.
He is also required to protect his ears, for a Jogi whose ears were
cut used to be buried alive, but is now only excommunicated. After
this probation his ears are bored by a gurú, or an adept, who is entitled
to Re. 1.4 as an offering which may or may not be accepted.
Up to a certain point the Jogi initiatory rites resemble those of the
Saniásís. The choti of the novice is removed by the gurú : the janeo
is also removed : and he is given saffron-coloured clothes to wear. Of
these the kafni is worn compulsorily. The guru-mantar is then com.
manicated, secretly. After this the Jogís of a certain sect' pierce the
chela's ears, and insert the kundal or earring, and the chela, hitherto
an aughar,* now becomes a náth, certain set phrases (not mantras)
being recited. According to Macauliffe Jogis smear ashes on their naked
bodies as clothing or a protection against the elements,t but the ashes
appear to symbclize their death to the world, like the kafni.
We may thus safely distinguish three stages in a Jogi's initiation.
At first he is a chela (pupil or candidate), then an aughar or novice,
and finally a darshani, vulg. kanphatta, § (or aplit-eured'). AD
Aughaş is not entitled to all the privileges of the sect, e.g., at a feast he
only receives half the portion of a Kanphatta. A Jogi who is fully
initiated certainly loses all rights of inheritance in his natural family,
but it is doubtful whether an Aughas would do so. It is also not clear
whether initiation involves the loss of property already vested in the
ipitiate, but presumably it would do so.
* According to this account aughaệ simply means novice. Náth is a title acquired by
the fully initiate. An account of the Jogis of Ratn Náth says that the candidate is given
& razor and scissors seven times by his gurn who deters him from entering tiro Jogi order,
but if he perseveres the guru cuts off a tuft of his hair and he is then shaved by a
barber. Then he is made to bathe and begmeared with ashes, a kaſni or shroud, a lingoti
and a cap being given to him. The ashes and kaſni clearly signify his death to the world.
After six münths' probation his ears are pierced and earthen rings inserted in them.
† Sikh Religion, VI, p. 243.
| It is indeed said that an aughar can become a Saniási, an Udási, a Bairagi, a
Suthráshibi, etc., etc., as well as a Jogi or a Jangam. On the other hand, some accounts
represent the Aughafs as a distinct order, followers of Kanípá Náth and Jblandhar Náth,
while the Kanphattas are followers of Gorakh and Machhendra (in other words, the more
perfect Jogís): or again they are connected with two schools of the Patanjali philosophy :
while a third account splits up the Jogís into Shiv worshippers and Serpent worshippers.
& Jogís themselves do not use the word Kanphatta. It is a popular term. 80 too in
common parlance Jogís are distinguished by various names according to their dress or
the penances they observe, and so on. Such are the bastardhárí who are decent'y clad
and live in temples (among the Saniásis this term means 'secular'): the dudhádhári,
who live on milk: the jațádhári who wear long matted hair : the munis who observe
perpetual silence; and tho." har tnperari, who stand in contemplation. The atit, destitute'
or liberated from worldly restraints does not appear to be a sect of the Jogis, as Macauliffe
8ey8 (Sikh Religion, I, p. 162), but a popular term for any mendicant: see Platts, p, 18,
It is believed that Jogis live for conturies as a result of their austerities,



402
Jogi divisions.
The derivation of Aughar is obscure. The grade or order, however
we regard it, does not appear to be connected with the Aghori or
Ghor-papthis who are cannibal faqirs of a singularly repulsive type.*
The Augbars of Kirána in Jhang are of good repute and retain large
jágírs granted them by the Sikhs. They are distinguished by an ochre-
coloured turban over which is twisted & black net-work of thread
covered with gold. The mahant is styled pír, and once elected may
never again descend the hill. i
To these three degrees may perhaps be added a fourth, that of.
mahátmá, a dignity hardly alluded to in the accounts rendered of the
sect. A Jogi who attains to great spiritual eminence is exempt from
wearing mundrus, the janeo, and so on.
After initiation a Jogí may apparently select the function which he
is to fulfil. Thus he may become a militant member of the sect, vowell
to celibacy and styled Nanga, Nága, Nádí, Nihang, Kanphaſa or
Kínphatta.
Or he may relapse and, breaking his row of celibacy, becomo a
secular Jogí, designated Bindí-Nági, Sanyogi (Samayogi), Gharbári or
Grihisti.
Lastly, the initiate Jogi may join one of the various panths or
orders. These panthe are in theory limited to twelve in number, but
in reality they number many more than twelve.
The divisions and offshoots of the Jogís.
The grouping of the Jogís is exceedingly complex and appears to
vary in different parts of these Provinces.
Thus in Kángra the Hindu Jogís are classed as · Andarlá' or Inner
and · Báhirla' or Outer Jogis ; and the former are further divided into
Darshanís and Anghars.t
The distinctions between these Ioner and Outer groups are not
specified, but they have different observances and their origin is thus
accounted for:-Once when Gorakh gave two goats to Machhendra's
sons he bade them slaughter the animals at a place where none could
see them. One boy killed his goat: but the other came back with his
alive, and said that he had found no such spot, since if no man were
present the birds would witness the slaughter, or, if there were no birds.
the sun or moon, Gorakh seated the latter boy by his side and he was
called Andarlá, while the other was expelled aud dubbed Báhirlá.
Both groups observe the usual Hindu social customs, except at death,
the only difference being that tlie Báhirla only give Brahmans food and
do not feast them, and at funerals they blow a núd instead of the
conch, which is used by the Andarlás.
* P.N.O., 1:41, 136, 375, 473. There is no sufficient evidence to connect Aughar with
ogre.' A ghori = un terrible, Monier-Williams, Sansk. Dicty., s. v. According to Platts
(p.106) aughaſ means awkward, ungainly, uncouth.
" The Darshanís have four sub-groups: Khokhar, Sonkhla, Jageru and Natti; while
the Aughar have six : Bhambaria, Biriá, Awán, Jiwan, Kália, Bharsi and Saroe. It does
not appear whether these are schools or sections.
The Bahirla are all Aughars and have a number of sub-groups : Raipur Marálu, Hetam,
Daryethi, Molgu, Tandiálu, Chuchhlu, Gugraon, Kehne, Tiargu, Dhamarchu, Phaleru,
Sidhpuru, Karan and Jhak.



Jogi groups.
403
from the Nangas so are said to webe further divi
Elsewhere the Darshanís* appear as a group which is distinguished
from the Nangas, who use flesh and spirituous liquor, which the former
avoid. The latter also are said to wear no clothes-- as their name denotes,
but the Darshavis are said to be further divided into two classes, of
which one is clothed, while the other, which smears the body with
ashes and affects the dhúní, is not. However this may be the Darshanís
must have their ears pierced and are thus identical with the Kanphara
or Kanphatta Jogís. The latter are celibate and live by begging, in
contradistinction to the Sanyogis who can marry and possess property.+
In Jínd the Jogís are said to be classed as (i) Bari-dargáh, of the
greater court,' who avoid flesh and spirits, and as (ii) Chhoţi-dargáh,
who do not. Both groups are disciples of Mast Náth, the famous
mahant of Bohar. Jálandhar Náth was the son of a Rájá, whose wife
remained pregnant for 12 years without giving birth to her child, and
she was thought to be afflicted with dropsy (jálandhar). At last
the Rájá vowed that, if a son were vouchsafed him, he would dedicate
him to Gorakhnáth. Jalandhar Náth was born in response to this
vow, and founded the panth named after him.
Rájá Bhartarí was the son of Rájá Bhoj, king of Dháranagar. He
had 71 ránis, of whom one, by name Pingla, was a disciple of Gorakh,
who gave her a flower saying it would remain ever fresh as long as her
husband was alive. One day to test Pingla's love Bhartarí went
a-hunting and sent back his blood-stained clothes and horse with the
news that he had been killed, but the rání, seeing the flower still fresh
knew that the Rájá only doubted her love for him and in grief at his
mistrust killed herself. When she was carried out to the burning-
ground the Rájá evinced great grief, and Gorakh appeared. Breaking
his chipí, ll the saint walked round it, weeping, and Bhartari asked
him why he grieved. Gorakh answered that he could get the Rájá
a thousand queens, but never a vessel like the one he had just broken,
and he showed him a hundred ránis as fair as Pingla, but each of them
said: 'Hold aloof! Art thou mad? No one knows how often we
have been thy mothers or sisters or wives. Hearing these words
Bhartari's grief was moderated and he made Gorakh his gurú, but
did not abandon his kingdom. Still when he returned to his kingdom
the loss of Pingla troubled him and his other queens bade him seek
distraction in hunting. In great pomp he marched forth, and the dust
darkened the sun. On the banks of the Samru he saw a herd of deer,
70 hinds with a single stag. He failed to kill the stag, and one of the
binds besought him to kill one of them instead, since the stag was as
dear to them as he was to his queens, but the Rájá said he, a Kshatriya,
could not kill a hind. So the hind who had spoken bade the stag meet
the Rájá’s arrow, and as he fell he said: "Give my feet to the thief
*e.g. in Ambála. Darshan is said to=mundra : it is ordinarily made of clay or glass,
but wealthy gurús wear darshans of gold.
+ So at least runs one version from Ambála.
| But in Dera Ghází Kháp we find Baſí-dargáh given as equivalent to Al-panthi, and the
Chioti-dargáh described as the foundation of a Chamár disciple of Pír Mast Náth, who
besiowed the title on him in reward for his faithful service,
$ Bhartarí, it is said, had steadfastly refused to become a disciple of Jalandhar Náth
though repeatedly urged to do so by Gorakh himself.
Il Chipi, a kind of vessel made of cocoanut and generally carried by faqirs.



The Jogi sub-orders.
that he way escape with his life; my horns to a Jogi that he may use
them as his nád; my skin to an ascetic that be may worship on it;
my eyes to a fair woman that she may be called mirga-naini* ; and
eat my flesh thyself.' And to this day these things are used as the dying
stag desired.
On his return the Rájá was met by Gorakh who said he had killed
one of his disciples. Bhartarí retorted that if he bad any spiritual
powers he could restore the stag to life, aod Gorakh, casting a little
earth on his body, did so. Bbartari then became a Jogi und with his
retainers accompanied Gorakh, but the latter refused to accept him
as a disciple unless he brought alms from his ránis, addressing them
as bis mothers, and practised jog for 12 years. Bhartarí did as he was
bid, and in answer to his queens' remonstrances said: “From the point
of view of my ráj ye are my queens, but from that of jog ye are my
mothers, as the gurú has bidden me call you so." Thos he became a
perfect jogi and founded the Bhartarí Bairág panth of the Jogis.
Upon no topic is our information 80 confused, contradictory and
incomplete as it is on the subject of the various sub-orders into which
the Jogis, as an order, are divided. The following is a list of most of
those sab-orders in alphabetical order with a brief note on each :
The Abha-panthi is probably identical with the Abhang Náth of
the Tahqiqat -Chishti.
The Aghori, Ghori or Aghor-panthi is an order which smears itself
with excrement, drinks out of a human skull and occasionally digs up
the recently buried body of a child and eats it ; thus carrying out the
principle that noibing is common or unclean to its extreme logical con-
clusion.
The Ai-panth is a well-known order, said to be ancient. In Dera
Gházi Khán it is called the Baſi-dargáh, and one of its saints, I when
engaged in yog, cursed one of his disciples for standing before hine with
only a langoti on and bade him remain nága or naked for ever. So
to this day bis descendants are called Nágas. Another account says
that this and the Haith-panthi order were founded by Gorakh Náth.
The chief ásan of the Ai-panth is at Bohar in the Rohtak district
It is said to have been founded by a famous gurú, named Narmái-jis
who was born only a few generations after Gorakh's time at Khot, now
in the Jínd State. In veneration for him all the succeeding gurús
adopted the termination Ai in lieu of Náth, and this is still done at
Khot but not at Bohar. Five generations after Narmái, Mast
Náth or Mastáí-ji became gurú at Bohar in Sambat 1788, and after
him the affix Nath was resumed there, though the ásan is still held
by the Aí-panth. Mast Náth died in Sambat 1804, and a fair is held
here on Phágan sudi 9th, the anniversary of his death. The ásan
contains no idols. Hindus of all castes are employed but those of the
medial castes are termed Chamarwá,ll but other initiates lose their
caste, and become merged in the order. At noon bhog or sacramental
* With eyes like a deer-one of the chief points in Indian beauty.
+ It is mentioned in the Dabistán: II, p. 128.
IPír Mast Náth, apparently
Š From narm, gentle. The meaning of ái is unknown or is at any rate not disclosed.
:ll They also appear to be called Sirbbangi.



The Jogi sub-orders.
405
food is offered to all the samádhs (of Bábá Mast Náth and other lights
of the order); and then the bhandár or refectory is opened and food
distributed freely to all, no matter what their caste. A lamp, fed
with ghi, is kept burning in each samádh. In a dharmsála near
Bohar is a Sanskrit inscription of Sambat 1333. The Bairág or
Bhartari Bairág order was founded by Rájá Bhartari, and ranks after
the Sat-Náth.* But in the west of these Provinces the Bairág's founda-
tion is ascribed to Prem Náth of Mochh in Miánwáli, the head-quarters
of the order beiog at Miání in Shabpur. Like the Daryá náthi this
order is an offshoot of that founded by Pír Ratn Náth of Pesháwar.
It has also representatives at Kálábágh and Isákhel.
The Bhartari Bairág Jogis found in the Báwal nizámat of Nábla
are secular and belong to the Punja (Ját) got, which they retain. Their
forebear Mai Náth was as a child driven from his home iu Delhi
district by famine, and the Muhammadan Meos of Solasbari in
Báwal brought him up. When the Játs seized the village he lived
by begging and became a jogi, su the Játs made him marry a girl
belonging to a party of juggler Jogís. Then he went to Narainpur
in Jaipur territory and became a chela of Gorakh Náth. -
The Bharang Náth of the Tahqiqat is possibly the Hándi-pharung.
The Brahma ká order appears to be the same as the Sat-náth.
The Darya-páthi order is chiefly found in the west, especially trans-
Indus. It possesses gaddis at Makhad on the Iudus, in Kohát and
even in Quetta.
The Dhaj-panthi order is found in or at least reported froni Pesháwar
and in Ambala. It may be that the order derives its name from dha;
meaning ilag. Mr. Maclagan mentions the Dbaj-panthi as followers of
Hanumán. The Tahqiqat gives Dhajá-panthi as the form of the vame.
The Dharm-náthí order is widely spread, but its head-quarters are
on the Godáwari. Its foundation is ascribed to a Rája Dharm.
The Gangá-nátbi order was founded by one of Kapal Muni's two
disciples. It is mentioned in the Tahqiqat as Gangáí-náth.
The origin of the Jalandbar-páth order has already been related.
In Amritsar it is known as Báwá Jálandhar ke, and its members
keep snakes.
The Kaniba-ki are said to be chelas of Jalandhar Náth. Of this
branch are the Sapelas : Maclagan, $ 55.
The Kapláni or Kapil-panthí order ascribes its origin to Kapal
Muni, and is thus also known as Kapal Deo ke. Or it was founded
by Ajai Pal, Kapal Muni's disciple, and is thus cousin to the Gangaa
náthi order.
The Kaya-náthi or Kayan. náthi is an offshoot of the Gangá-náthi.
But in Dera Ghazi Khán it is said that they received their name from
Pír Ratn Náth who made an image out of the dirt of his own body.
* At least in Dera Gházi, in which district it is returned as Bairaj, another order (said
to be derived from it) being styled Bairaj Marigká. In Ambála à Baraj order is
mentioned. In Karnal Bairág and Bhartari appear as two distinct orders.



406
The Jogi sub-order8.
The Kanthar or Khantar order owes its origin to Gapésba. In
Ambála it is said to be endogamous.
Lachhman Náth's order is said in Hoshiarpur to be also known as
the Darbári Náth Tilla Bál Gondai, but in Amritsar is said to be
the same as the Natesri (as in Maclagan, $ 55).
The Mái-ka-panth are disciples of the Devi Kali.
The Man Manthi appear to be identical with the Man Náth, returned
from Peshawar, and the Manathi or Mapnati in Jhelum who ascribe
their foundation to Rájá Rasálú. Mr. Maclagan mentions the Mán.
Náth as followers of Rasálú, $ 55.
The Mékhla dhári is a class or order wbich is returned from Ambala
and its name is said to mean wearer of the tarági. :
The Natesri order appears to have no representatives in the Punjab
but see above under Lacbhman Náth's order. -
The Ním Náthia is distinct from the order founded by Páras Nath q.o.
It is said to be also called Gapláni or Kisgai.
The Pápanth appears to be also called Pánáthi or Panpatai, a sub-
order founded by Jálandhar as a disciple of Mahádeo.
The Pagal appears to be identical with the Ráwal-Ghalla.
The Paras Náth order is sometimes shown as half an order, the
Ráwals being its other half. But Páras Náth was one of Machhendra's
two sons and he founded an order which soon split up into two dis-
tinct schools, (i) the Púj- who are celibate but live in honses and ob-
serve none of the rules observed by (ii) the Sartoras, who always
wear a cloth over the mouths, strain water before drinking it, never
kill aught that has life : further they never build houses, but lead a
wandering life, eating only food cooked by others, and smoking from
a chilam, never from a hukkah. That these two sub-orders are hoth
Jains by religion, if not by sect, is perfectly obvious, and it is indeed
expressly said that this Páras Náth is he whom the Jains revere.
The Rám-ke, or Rám Chandra-ke, panth was founded by Rám Náth,
a disciple of Santokh Náth, and had its head-quarters on the Godáwari
till it was replaced there by the Dharm-náthí. It appears to be some-
times ascribed to Rám Chandra, bùt erroneously so.
The Sant-náthi appear to be quite distinct from the Sat-páthi.
The Sat-náth (or Brahma-ke q.v.)
The Santokh Nathi are mentioned by Mr. Maclagan as followers of
Bishn Narain, and are probably the Vishnu of Amritsar.
Other orders inentioned are the Bade ke, in Dera Ghází Khán, the
Báljati in Karnál, the Bharat in Dera Ghází Khán, Haith-panthi in
Ambála and Jhelum, Hariáni, Latetri and Mai ka paoth in Dera Ghází
Khán, the Path-sana in Karnal (Patsaina in Jínd), Ridh Náth in
Amritsar, Sahj in Ambála, and the Bishnu in Amritsar.
In Mr. Maclagan's lists also appear the Kalepá and Ratn Náth : and
in the Tahqiqat-i-Chishti the Dbar Náth, Darpa-Náth, Kanak Náth and
Nág Náth* are also mentioned.
Possibly the Ráwals.



407
Jogi offshoots.
The Pádha are described in Ambála us a caste, originally Jogis, but
purely secular and now endogamous.
The influence of Jogís on and beyond the north-west frontier is one
of the most remarkable features of the cult. Legend connects the Gor-
khatri at Peshawar with Gorakh, and it was once a Jogi baunt, as
both Bábar and Abu'l-Fazl testify. The chief saint of the Jogís in
the north-West is Pír Ratn Náth of Pesháwar, * in which district as
well as throughout Kábul and Khorásán, a kabit is said to be current
which describes his power.
The disciples of Pír Ratn Náth do not wear the mundra, and to
account for this tradition says that once when Jogis of the 12 orders
had assembled at Tilla for a tukra observance, Ratn Náth, who had no
earrings, t was only assigned a half share. He protested that a Jogi
who had earrings in his heart need waar done in his ears, and he opened
his breast to exhibit the mundra in his heart! So his disciples are ex.
empt from the usual role of the sect. They appear to belong to the
Darsá-nátbi panth but the branch of Pír Rain Náth's dera at Miáni in
Sháhpur is held by Bairág-ke-Jogis.
The Bachho wália is a group of Mahammadan Jogís who claim de-
scent from one Gajjan Ját and yet have more than one Hindu got
(Pandhi, Cháhil, Gil, Sindhu and Rathoraſ). Like Hindus they marry
outside the got. They are chroniclers or panegyrists, and live on alms,
carrying a jħoli (wallet) and a turban composed of two dopaţtas, each
of a different colour, as their distinctive costume. Originally Hindus
they adopted Islám and took to begging, their name being doubtless
derived from H. bichha, 'alms.' But they have, of course, a tale to
explain their name and say that their forebears grazed a Kumhár's
bachhama story inconsistent with the fact that they are not ail of one
and the same got, but which doubtless alludes to their ancient worship
of the earth-god.
Another Muhammadan group is that of the Kál-pelias as the dis-
ciples of Ismá'il are sometimes called. Little seems to be known about
Isma'il except that he was initiated by one of the Sidh Sanskarípá.
He is also said to have been an adept in black magic and '& con-
temporary of one Kamakba devi. It is difficult to avoid the conjecture
that he is in some way connected with the Ismailiaps.
The Ráwals, however, are the most important of the Muhammadan
Jogi groups. Found, mainly, in the western districts they wander far
and wide over the rest of India, and even to Europe where they practise
as quack occulists and physicians. The name is, indeed, said to be a
* There are Jogi shrines at Kohát, Jalálábád and Kábul, as well as at Pesháwar, and
the incumbent at the three last named is styled Gosáin. Pír Bar Náth of Kohát was
initiated on a stone near the Bawána springs. Even the fanatical Muhammadans of theso
parts reverence Pír Ratn Náth.
+ As a novice (Aughar) he would wear no earrings and only be entitled to half a share.
Another version is that Ratn Náth demanded a double share and, when objection was taken.
created a man, named Kanian Náth, from the sweat and dirt of his own body. Other
stories explain that a Jogi of eminent piety is exempt from the rule requiring à Jogi to
wear earrings and a janen.
1 Add Mandhár (Rájputs) and Sidhu, Ohima, Sahnti, Saháran, Lit, Samrao and Hambar
(Játs) in Nábha. The Bachhowália appears to be a numerous group in the Phulkiến
States.



408
Jogi offshonte.
corruption of the Persian rávinda,'traveller,' 'wanderer': and tradi.
tion avers that when Ránjha, iu his love for Hír, adopted the guise of
a faqir and wandered till be came to Tilla, be became Pír Bála Náth's
disciple and thence went to Jhang where he sought for bis beloved.
All his disciples and companions were called Ráwal.*
The Ráwals are sometimes said to be divided into two groups,
Mandiat and Ghal, I but according to one account they form a half of
one of the 12 orders, the other being the Páras Náth, i.e. the Jains.
Probably this latter tale merely means that the Ráwals like the Jains
are an offshoot of the Jogi cults.
The Já'fir Pírs.
In the reign of Akbar there lived in Rajauri a Jogi named Shakkar
Náth who was challenged by the Muhammadans to provide sugar in
that country, in which the article was scarce. Shakkar' by his
prayers caused it to rain sugar on the 10th of Rajab, 910 A. A
(Shakkar was the disciple of Badeshar Náth of Badeshar, and when
Akbar visited that place and ordered a fort to be built there Badeshar
Náth caused all the springs to dry up, by throwing a stone, whicl
made Akbar abandon his project.]
Pír' Shakkar Náth on his death-bed, having no disciples, called to
the only man near him, one Ja'fir, a Muhammadao, and made him his
successor, thus starting a new order. He advised Ja'fir to make only
uncircumcised Muhammadans his disciples, and this rule is still ob.
served by the order which employs Hindu cooks, and whose members
bore their ears, but do not eat with other Jogís, thougb they enjoy all
their privileges. The Jogís of Pír Já'fir are Sant-náthiás by sect.
TheJangams.
The Jangam, or Jogi.Jangam as he is sometimes called in contradis.
tinction to the Jogi proper, originated thus: When Shiva married
Párbatí no one would accept alms at his hands, so he created a man
from his thigh (jáng) and, giving him alms, promised him immortalits
but declared he should live by begging. The Jangams are divided into
four groups, (i) Múl, celibates, who practise jog in the pránayám form :
(ii) Langoch, celibate, also wbo carry the image of Shiva in the Narbad-
eshwar incarnation in a small phylactery round the neck (chiefly found
in the south of India): (iii) Sail, also celibate, found chiefly in the hills
as they avoid mixing with worldly people; and (iv) Diru, found in the
sonth-east Punjab. This last-named group is secular and is recruited
from the Brahman, Rajput, Bhát, Ját and A roſa castes. But the got
appears to be often lost on entering tbe group, for it is said to comprise
15 gots :-
Powár
Indauria.
Bhat.
Kajwábi.
Sadher.
Bainíwál.
Tanur.
Nehri.
Chandíwál,
Duple.
Redhu.
Laran.
Narro.
Chhal.
elibate, also wohylactery round found chiefy innt in the
Sahag.
* The story is clearly based on the time-honoured analogy which compares the desire
of the soul to human passion. The word Ráwinda is of considerable interest,
+ Founded by Gorakh Náth.
1 Founded by Mabadeo and also said to be called Pagal,



The Jogi caste.
409
Kannbihhendra isciple of, owe their
Marriage is effected by exchange, two gots being avoided.*
Rupees 50, 25, 15 or 10 are spent on a wedding, according to its class.
Widows remarry, but, if a widow marry one who is excommunicated,
the man is inade to bathe in the Ganges and feast the brotherhood ; then
the pair are re-admitted into the caste.
Another version is that Shiva at his wedding created two recipients
of his alms, one, Jangam, from the sweat of his brow, the other,
Lingam, from his thigh. These Jangams accept alms from all Hindus,
at least in the western Districts, whereas Lingams only take them
from Jogís and Saniásis. Bnt it is usually said that the Jangam ac-
cepts alms from Jogís.
To the Jangam Shiva gave the bull's necklace hung with a bell or
jaras, and everytbing that was on his head, and 80 Jangams still
wear figures of the moon, serpents, etc., on their heads. He also or.
dered them to live by begging, and so Jangams still sing songs about
Shiva's wedding, playing on the jaras as they beg. Instead of the
mundra they wear brass flowers in their ears, carry peacock's feathers,
and go about begging in the bazars, demanding a pice from each shop.
They are looked' upon as Brahmans and are said to correspond with the
Lingayats of Central and Southern India.
The Sapelas or Sampelas.
The sampelas, or snake-men, claim Kánnhipi (Kanípá), the son of the
Jhínwar who caught the fish from which Machhendra Náth had emerged :
Kánnhipi was brought up with him and became a disciple of Jálandhar
Náth. By which is meant that snake-charmers, like snakes, owe much
to the waters. The sampelas are not celibate; though they have their
ears bored and wear the mundra, with ochre-dyed clothes, and they rank
lower than the Hindu Jogís because they will take food from a Muham-
madan and eat jackal. They tame snakes, playing on the gourd-pipe
(bín), and lead a wandering life, but do not thieve. Their semi-religious
character places them above the Kanjars and similar tribes. Some of
their gots are :
Gádaria.
Linak.
Athwal.
Chauhan.
Sohtra.
Phenkļa.
Tahlíwál.
Bámna.
In marriage four gots are avoided.
The Jogis as a caste.
The secular Jogi or Samyogi, as he should apparently be called, does
in parts of the Punjab form a true caste. Thus in Kulla be has become
a Nata and in Ambála a Jogi-Pádha, In Loháru there is a small Jogi
caste of the Játu tribe which was founded by a Rájput of that tribe.
Of his two sons the descendants of one, Báre Náth are secular, when
those of the other Bar Náth remain celibate, pierce their ears and wear
the mundra, though how they are recruited is not explained. In ail
respects they follow the usual rites save at death. They bury the body
seated, facing north and place a pitcher of water under its right arm
and some boiled rice under its left arm. Widow remarriage is
allowed.
* Marriage by purchase appears to be forbidden, and if the bride's family has not a boy
eligible to marry at once, the bridegroom's family will owe them a girl till one is required.
be-dyed clotba from a Muu-pipe
Tánk,



410
Johal-Joiya.
In Ambála the Samyogis (not the Padhas) are said to have 12 sec-
tions, including the :-
Ai.
Kanthar,
Dhaj.
Pagal.
Hahj.
Paopantbi.
Hait.
Ráwal.
The Kanthars are said to be endogamous, but all the others inter-
marry. In Nábha the pádhas, however, do not appear to be a caste,
but are simply Jogis who teach children Kindi.
Though professing Jogis are forbidden to marry, many of them
do so, and it is impossible to disentangle the Jogis who abandon celibacy
from those who do not profess it at all and form a caste. In Dera
Gházi Kbán, for instance, Jogis intermarry but not within their caste
as Jogis. There is no bar to Hindu or a Sanyási taking a Jogi girl
in marriage, but respectable Hindus do not do so. Their marriage
ceremonies are generally like those of Hindus, as Brahmans perform
them. A Jogi who marrjes is regarded with comtempt by his brother
Jogis, who do not smoke with him until he has given a feast at a
cost of Rs. 12-8 to an assembly of Jogis at some sacred place, such
as the bank of the Ganges, or a fair.
On the other hand Grihisti Jogis retain many outward signs of the
professing Jogi. They wear saffron coloured clothes and sometimes
smear ashes over the body. They use the janeo of black wool which
is smaller than that worn by a Brahman or other twice-born Hindu.
They wear a nád of horn or else have a bit of wood made in the shape
of a nád and attached to the janeo. They are obliged to wear a
paunchi of wool round their hands and feet and a woollen string round
the waist. They also use the rosary of rudraksh beads. Some have
their ears bored while others go to Gorakh Nath's gaddi and get a
kanthi tied round the neck. Though the use of flesh and liquor is
permissible they follow the Brahmans and abstain from them. They
live on alms and by singing the love tales of Hír and Ránjha, etc., and
ballads like those of Jaimal and Fattah, etc. Others live by exhibiting
nadia bulls. In Karnál the Jogis by caste are generally Hindus and
receive offerings made to the impure gods. They form one of the
lowest of all castes and practise witchcraft and divination, being also
musicians.
Jogal, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JOHAR, a Hindu family of Talagang in Jhelum.
Jolya. The Joiya is one of the 36 royal races of Rájpats, and is described
in the ancient chronicles as “lords of the Jaogal-des," a tract which
comprehended Hariána, Bhațgiána, Bhatner, and Nagor. They also
held, in common with the Debía with whom their name is always
coupled, the banks of the Indus and Sutlej near their confluence. Some
seven centuries ago they were apparently driven out of the Indus tract
and partly subjugated in the Bágar country by the Bhatti ; and in the
middle of the 16th century they were expelled from the Joiya canton
of Bíkáner by the Ráthor rulers for attempting to regain their inde-
pendence. Tod remarks that “the Rájputs carried fire aod sword
jato this country, of which they made a desert. Ever since it has
Given ou Bhatti, una canton



to i Bhatroot the he Detailed as Janninghs or monclass of
joiya traditions.
: 411
remained desolate, and the very name of Joiya is lost, though the vestiges
of considerable towns bear testimony to a remote antiquity." The
Joiya, however, have not disappeared. They still hold all the banks of
the Sutlej from the Wattu border nearly as far down as its confluenco,
with the Indus, though the Bhattis turned them cut of Kabror, and they
lost their semi-independence when their possessions formed a part of
the Baháwalpur State ; they hold a tract in Bikáner on the bed of the
old Ghaggar just below Bhatner, their ancient seat; and they are found
in no inconsiderable numbers on the middle Sutlej of Lahore and Fe-
rozepur and on the lower Indus of the Deraját and Muzaffargarh, about
a third of their whole number being returned as Játs. The Multán bár
is known to this day as the Joiya bár. General Cunningham says that
they are to be found in some numbers in the Salt Range or mountains
of Júd, and identifies them with the Jodia or Yodia, the warrior class of
India in Panini's time (450 B. C.), and indeed our figures show some
2,700 Joiya in Shahpur. But Paníní's Jodia would perhaps more pro.
bably be the modern Gheba, whose original tribal name is said to be
Jodra, and Gbeba a mere title. The Joiya of the Sutlej and of Hissár
trace their origin from Bhatner, and have a curious tradition, current
apparently from Hissár to Montgomery, to the effect that they cannot
trace their Rájput descent in the male line, The Hissár Joiya make
themselves descendants in the female line of Seja or Sameja, who accon-
panied the eponymous ancestor of the Bhațți from Muttra to Bhatner.
This probably means that the Joiyas claim Yádu ancestry. The Mont-
gomery Joiya have it that a lineal descendant of Benjamin, Joseph's
brother, came to Bíkáner, married a Rája's daughter, begot their ancestor,
and then disappeared as a faqir. The tradition is perhaps suggested
by the word joi, meaning - wife.” The Montgomery Joiya say that
they left Bíkáner in the middle of the 14th century and settled in
Baháwalpur, where they became allies of the Langáh dynasty of Multán,
but were subjugated by the Dáúdpotra in the time of Nadir Shah.
The Multán Joiya say that they went from Bíkáner to Sindh and thence
to Multán. This is probably due to the fact of their old possessions on
the Indus having died out of the tribal memory, and been replaced by
their later holdings in Bíkáner. They are described by Captan
Elphinstone as “of smaller stature than the great Rávi tribes, and
considered inferior to them in regard of the qualities in which the
latter especially pride themselves, namely bravery and skill in cattle.
stealing. They possess large herds of cattle and aro bad cultivators."
The Mahárs are a small tribe on the Sutlej opposite Fázilka, and are said
to be descended from Mahár, a “ brother of the Joiya. They are said
to be quarrelsome, silly, thievish, fond of cattle, and to care little for
agricultural pursuits."
In Bahawalpur the mirásis of the Joiyas bave compiled for them a pedigree-table which
makes them and the Mahárs Quraishis by origin and descended from Iyás, a descendant of
Mahmúd of Ghazni. But the mirásis of each sept of the Joiyas give a different pedigree
above Iyás, a fact which tends to show that the Joiyas were in their origin à confederation
of warrior clans.
The Lakhwera sept and others recount the following tale. They say that Iyás, son of
Ba kr, came to Chubarbar (now Anúpgarb), the capital of Rája Chúhar Samoja, in the guise
of a faqir, and married Nal, the Rája's eldest daughter, * by whom he became the father of
Joiya in 400 H. Joiya was brought up in the house of his mother's father as a Hindu.
* Pal and Sal being the other two,



The Joiya septs.
though his father was a Muhammadan and had married Nal by nikáh and so Joiya's
children, Jabbu, Isung, Bisung, Nisung, and Sáhan Pál, received Hindu names. From the
youngest (apparently) of these sons the Joiyas claim descent.* The Joiyas as a tribe regard
Ali Khán, Lakhwera, ra'is of Shahr Farid as their chief, and his influence extends over the
Joiyas in Multán. A Joiya who has committed theft will not deny the fact before
this chief.
The Lakhwera, Bhadera, Ghazi Khánána, Kulhera, Daulatána, Kamera and Mangher septs
and a few others, observe the winaik ceremony. This consists in slaughtering two rams
(ghattus) and making a pulao (with rice cooked in ghi) of the flesh. This is given in
charity in the name of their ancestor Allahditta who single-handed resisted a party of 50
Baloch who tried to rand the cattle he was tending in the Cholistán. Allahditta was killed,
but his bravery is commemorated in the winaik and his tomb in the Táj-Sarwar is greatly
frequented by the tribe. Lunán's name is also mentioned in the winaik, because he fell in s
fight with Lahr Joiya, a descendant of Jai Sung at Kharbára in Bíkáner, where his tomb
still exists. The descendants of the Joiyas shown in the pedigree-table from Bansi upwards
observe only the winaik of Lunán, not that of Alláhditta.
The Joiyas are brave, but, like the Wattús, addicted to theft. The Lakhwera sept is the
highest in the social scale and has a great reputation for courage. The tribe is devoted to
horses and buffaloes. No Joiya considers it derogatory to plough with his own hands, but
if a man gives up agriculture and takes to trade or handicraft the Joiyas cease to enter into
any kind of relationship with him. Sahn Pál is said to have coined his own money at
Bhatner, a proof that he exercised sovereign power. Báwa Farid-ud-Dín, Shakar-Ganj,
converted Lunán, Ber and Wisul to Islám and blessed Lunán, saying " Lunán, dunán,
chaunán," i. e., “may Lunán's posterity multiply." These three brothers wrested the
fortress of Bhatinda from the Slave Kings of Delhi and ruled its territory, with Sirsa and
Bhatner, independently.
Lakhkho, son of Luoán, headed a confederation of the Joiyas, Bhattis, Ráthors and
Waryás against the Víkas, or Bíkas, the founders of Bíkáner, whose territory they devast-
ated until their king, Rája Ajras, gave his daughter Kesar in marriage to Lakhkho, and
from that time onwards the Hindu Rajputs of Bikáner gave daughters to the Muhammadan
Joiyas as an established custom up to within the last 50 years, when the practice ceased.
After Lakhkho, Salim Khán rose to power in the time of Aurangzeb. He founded a
Salimgarh which he gave to Pír Shauq Shah, whence it became called Mári Shauq Shah,
and founded a second Salímgarh, which was however destroyed by Aurangzeb's orders, but
on its ruins his son Farid Khan I founded Shahr Farid in Baháwalpur. After the downfall
of the Mughal empire the Lakhwera chiefs continued for some time to pay tribute at Multán
and Nawáb Wali Muhammad Khán Khakwáni, its gorernor, married a Joiya girl, Ihsán
Bibi, and thus secured their adherence, which enabled him to find a refuge among the
Admera and Saldera Joiyas when the Mahrattas took possession of Multán in 1757 X. D.
After this the Joigas under Farid Khán II revolted against Salih Muhammad Khan, whom
the Mahrattas had appointed governor of Multán, and plundered his territory, but in 1172
A. D., when Ahmad Shah, Abdéli, had expelled the Mahrattas from Multán he re-appointed
Wali Muhammad Khán to its governorship and to him the Joiyas submitted. Under the
emperor Zamán Khán, however, the Joiyas again rose in rebellion and at the instance of
the governor of Multán Nawab Mubárak Khán of Baháwalpur annexed the territory of
Farid Khán II.
The Joiya septs are very numerous, 46 being enumerated as principal septs alone + Of
those the more important are the Lakhwera, Daulatána, Bhadera Nihál-ka, Gházi-Khánána,
Jalwána, which has a sub-sept called Bhaon, their ancestor having been designated
Nekokára-Bhai or the “virtuous brother" by Abdulla Jahánián. Most of the Joiya septs
aro eponymous, their names ending in -ka and sometimes in -era.
The following septs are found in Montgomery (where they are classed
as Rájput agriculturists) :-Akoke, Bablana, Bhatti, Fírozko, Hassanke,
ve
* This table is printed in full in the Bahúwalpur Gazetteer, p. 46.
+ Joiyas are divided into a large number of “naks": (i) Lakhwera. (ii) Mahmúdera,
Kamrána, Madera (all three equal), (iii) Jalwána and Daulatána. The grading of the
tribe in the social scale is as above. They intermarry, as a rule, only among themselves,
but a nak of one grade will not give daughters to a nuk of a lower grade, though the former
will take from the latter,
In the time of Akbar t hey were the predominate tribe of the Mailsi and Lodhrán tahsils,
and then, or soon after, four brothers, Jágan, Mangan, Luddan and Lál colonised the country
round Luddan, and were followed by fresh bands from across the Sutlej. Multán Gr.,
(902, p. 139.



Jojah-Juláhá.
413
Jamlera, Jhandeke, Jugeke, Lakhuke, Langáheke, Luleke, Mihruke,
Momeke, Panjera, Ranoke, Sábúke, Sanatheke and Shálbázi : and in
Multán Sabúl and Salhúká, and Saldera, but the latter are in this
District ciassed as Játs. Indeed both in Montgomery and in Multán
the Joiyas as a tribe appear to rank both as Játs and Rájputs. In
Amritsar they are classed as Rajputs and in Shahpur as Jaţs. In
Montgomery the Kbarrals and Hindu Kambohs each possess a Joiya
(agricultural) clan.
JOJAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
JOKHÁRU, a leech or leech-applier : see Gágrá.
JOLÁH, a weaver, rope-maker, etc. : the joláhs in Yusafzai form a trade-guild,
rather than a caste like the Juláhá.
JOLDAÐá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JOMAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JoŅdas, a Ját clau (agriculturatl) found in Amritsar.
Jopo, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
JORYE, (1) an Aráíņ, (2) a Kamboh clan (both agricultural) found in Auritsar.
Josan, (1) a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán, (2) an Aráin and (3) a
Kamboh clan (both agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Josi, Joshi, a sub-division of Brahmans, apparently meaning astronomer
(JOTASI).
JOTASI, -SHI, an astronomer or astrologer, from jotas (Sanskr. jyotisha, as-
trology). The Lábula form is jodhsi, 9. v., and in Spiti the choba is the
hereditary astrologer. Josi or Joshi is apparently a derivative.
Jód, a tribe, now almost extinct, which with the JANJÚA are described by
Bábar as holding half the Salt Range which was called the Koh-i-Júd
after them. See under Jodh.
Júnán, an Awán tribe said to be descended from Pású and Hamír, the
two sons of Jahan, son of Qutb Sbáh, found in Sialkot.
JULÁHA, fem. -i, syp. safed-báf. The weavers proper, of which the Juláha, as
he is called in the east, and the Páuli as he is called in the villages of
the west, is the type, are an exceedingly numerous and important
artisan class, more especially in the western Districts where no weaving
is done by the leather-working or scavenger castes. It is very possible
that the Juláhá is of aboriginal extraction. Indeed Sir James Wilson
who had, in the old Sirsa district, 'unequalled opportunities of coin-
paring different sections of the people, is of opinion that the Juláhás
and Chamárs are probably the same by origin, the distinction between
them having arisen from divergence of occupation. Be this as it may,
there is no doubt that the present position of the two is widely dis-
similar. The Juláhá does not work in impure leather, he eats no
carrion, he touches no carcases, and he is recognised by both Hindu
and Musalmán as a fellow-believer and admitted to religious equality.
In a word, the Chamár is a menial, the Julálá an artisau. The real
fact seems to be that the word Julahá, from the Persian julal, ball



414
Juláhá groups.
of thread, the equivalent Hindi term being Tánti, is the name of the
highest occupation ordinarily open to the outcast section of the com-
munity. Thus we find Koli-Juláhás, Chamár-Juláhás, Mochi-Juláhás,
Rámdási-Juláhás, and so forth: and it is probable that after a few
generations these men drop the prefix which denotes their low origin,
and become Juláhas pure and simple. The weaver appears to be called
Golah in Pesháwar and Kásbi in Hazára.
The Juláhá proper is scantily represented in the south-east Punjab,
where his place is taken by the Koli* or Chamár-Juláhá and
Dhának; and he is hardly known in the Deraját, where probably the
Ját does most of the weaving. In the rest of the Province he con-
stitutes some 3 to 4 per cent. of the total population. He is generally
a Hindu in Kangſa and Delhi, and often Hindu in Karnal, Ambála, and
Hoshiárpur; but on the whole some 92 per cent. of the Juláhás are
Musalmán. Sikhs are few in number.
The Juláha confines himself almost wholly to weaving. He is not
a true village menial, being paid by the piece and not by customary
dues. He is perbaps the most troublesome of the artisan classes. Like
the shoe-maker of Europe, be follows a wholly sedentary occupation,
and in the towns at least is one of the most turbulent classes of the
community. There is a proverbial sayiug: “How should a weaver be
patient ? " Indeed the contrast between the low social standing and
the obtrusive pretentiousness of the class is often used to point à pro-
verb: “A weaver by trade, and his name is Fatah Khán ('victorious
chief ')..' “ Lord preserve us! The weaver is going out hunting !"
“ Himself a weaver, and he has a Saiyad for his servant!” “Wbat!
Patháns the bond servants of weavers!” and so forth.
The Juláhá sub-divisions are exceedingly numerous, but the names of
most of the larger ones are taken from dominant land owning tribes.
Some of the largest are :-Bhattis who are very widely distributed ;
Khokhars chiefly found west of Lahore ; Janjuas and Awáns in the
Ráwalpindi division ; Sindhus in the Central Punjab, and the Jaryáls
in Kángra. The Kabírbapsi are found in Ambála and Kángra, and ap-
parently this word has become a true tribal name and now includes
Musalmán Julábás. It is derived from the great Bhagat Kabír of
Benares who was himself a Julábá, and whose teaching most of the
Hiodu Juláhás profess to follow. The eastern Juláhás are said to
be divided into two great sections, Deswále, or those of the country, and
Tel, the latter being supposed to be descended from a Juláh, who
married a Teli woman. The latter are socially inferior to the former.
In the Jumna districts there are also a Gangápuri (? Ganga pári) and a
Multáni section, the former being found only in the Jumna valley and
the latter on the borders of the Málwa.
Further west we find the Muhammadan Juláhás divided into several
groups, mostly territorial, e. g., in Jíod we have the Jángli, Deswali,
• According to Mr. J. G. Delmerick Hindu weavers are only found in the Punjab cis-
Sutlej. In the Punjab hills they are Kolis, in the United Provinces Kolis or Koris. In the
plains they style themselves Rámdásias. In the Upper Punjab the weaver is always a
Muharnmadan, and is called Núrbáf or Báfindah as well as Páoli, Sofedbáf or Juláhá. In
Sikh times they wore glad to accept grain as wages, but they now ofact cash.



416
Juldhá religions.
Bajwarya and Páryá sub-castes. But the Nábba version gives six
Broops, four territorial, viz., Jángla, Pawadhșe (of the Pawádh'), Bágrí
and Multáni (these two latter are not found in the State), one called
Páre and a sixth called Mochia which is noininated from the Mochis.
The four groups found in Jind all eat and smoke together. The Jánglis
are found in the Jangal tract of tahsil Sangrúr. They have heredi.
tary Pírs, who are Sayyids. In adopting a Pír a murid (disciple) takes
a cup of sharbat from his hand and drinks it, believing that by so
doing he will attain to Bahisht (Paradise). They revere their Pírs,
give them a rupee and a wrapper when they come to their house and
anteriain them well. The Jángli gots are those of the Játs and Rájputs,
and it is said that they were converted during the reign of Aurangzeb.
Some of them still retain their Brahman parohits and give them money
at weddings.
They only avoid their own got in marriage.
The Páre in Nábha follow the Muhammadan Law as to marriage,
whereas the other five groups avoid four gots in marriage, like Hindus.*
T'he Muhammadan Juláhás are said to be very strict observers of the
Id-ul-fitr, just as the Qassábs (butchers) hold the Id-ul-zuhá in special
esteem, while the Kanghigaráns affect the Shab-i-barát and the
Sayyids the Muharram.t
On the other hand the Hindu Juláhás of these Phulkián States are
divided into sectarian groups, such as the Rámdásís and Kabírpanthis.
The Rámdásís are the followers of the saint, Rám Dás, the Chamár
who was a chela of Lakhmír. Having abandoned his calling as a shoe-
maker, he took up weaving and followed the teachings of the Granth.
The Rámdási do not eat, smoke or intermarry with the Chamárs.
They practise karewa and perform the wedding rite, according to the
anand báni of the Granth Sahib, fire being lighted before the scripture
and seven turns (pheras) being made round the fire, while the anand
báni is read. No Brahman is called in. They burn their dead and
carry the ashes to the Ganges. Some of their gots are :
1. Bhangar.
4. Sokri.
7. Samjar.
2. Barah.
5. Chohan,
8. Senbmár.
3. Berwal.
6. Saroe.
9. Máti,
10. Goru.
The Kabírpanthis are the followers of Kabír Bhagat, chelá (disciple)
of Rámanand, founder of the Rámánandi sect of the Bairagis. Kåbír
is said to have been born at Benares and adopted by a Musalmán
Juláhá during the reign of Sikandar Shah Lodi (1488-1512 A. D.).
The story goes that Kabír wished to be Rámanand's chelu but he re-
fused to adopt him as he was a Muhammadan. So one day Kabir lay
down on the road by which Ramanand went to bathe in the Ganges
every morning, and by chance Rámanand touched him with his foot.
He exclaimed “ Rám, Rám," so Kabír took the word Rám as his Gurú
mantra and assumed the malá or beads and tilak or forehead mark of
* Mubammadan Jalábás of the Katahra got in Zira tahsil of Ferozepur do not inter.
marry in their own got and also avoid that of the mother's father. They also refuso to
marry & son into a family in which his sister is married,
+ N. I, N. .. I. 648,



i, or followendant of Kabir: mdeo). They will loven
416
Jún—Jútá.
a Bairagi. At first Rámanand was opposed to him, but after som dis-
cussion he accepted him as his chela. His doctrine and precapts are
very popular and are embodied in the Sukh Nidhán Granth, the Bijak
and other poems.
Kabír used to earn his livelihood by weaving blankets which he sold
for 7 takkas a-piece. One day Falsehood (jhúth) appeared to him in
human guise and urged him to demand 12 takkas instead of 7: he did
so but only received 9, so he said :-
Sache'kahán to máriyeJhuthe jagat patiáwe,
Sat takke ká bhúrá,- Mera nau takke bik jáwe.
"If I speak the truth, I shall suffer, since the world is content with
lies, so I spoke false and sold my blanket for 9 takkas."
Since then falsehood has been rife in the world. Starch owes its
origin to a sparrow's having let its droppings fall on Kabír's cloth, as he
was weaving. Every weaver invokes Kabír or Luqmán on beginning
work.
As a Kabírpanthi, or follower of Kabír's teaching, the Julábá calls
himself Kabírbansi or a descendant of Kabír, just as the Chhímba
prefers to be called Námdevi (descendant of Námdeo). They will never
take a false oath in the names of these supposed ancestors, and even
when in the right, seldom venture to swear by them. Both castes are
offended at the ordinary names of Julábá and Darzi, i.e., Chhímba).*
The Juláhás, like the darzis, are recruited from various castes, but
especially from the Dhának and Chamár below, whereas the tailors
are recruited from the castes above them.
Júụ, lit. 'louse,' a Ját tribe found in Karnál, originally settled in Delhi.
JUNAN, a tribe in Bahawalpur, descended from Jám Juna,t who ruled
Sind in the 8th century of the Hijra. They give their name to the
State of Junagadh. The Japans migrated from Shikárpur in the 18th
century A. D. and were granted lands in Baháwalpur.
JÚND-BÚGDiál, a clan of the Awáns, so called from Jund, their principal
village, found in Ráwalpindi and Pindi Gheb. Their traditions point to
their being a race of marauders.
JUNHál, a Rájput tribe, once numerous and powerful. It is found on the
borders of Kashmír and the Kahúta tahsil, in Rawalpindi, in a beautiful
country. They were nearly all destroyed by the Gakkhars and were
rivals of the Hadwals.
JUNAI, a Muhammadan Ját clau (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JURAI, . Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
JÓTÁ, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán and Montgomery.
* N. I. N. Q. I., $ 72.
+ This must be the Jám Juna, Sammá, who succeeded Unar, the second ruler of the
Samma dynasty. Duff's Chronology of India, p. 302.



417
K.
KABÍR-PANTHI, a follower of Kabír. A life of Kabír, who was a little earlier
than Luther, having been born in 1440, and who died in 1518 A. D.,
is beyond the scope of this article.* Of all the fourteen persons
usually classed as Bhagats or saints, viz., Bení, Bhíkan, Dhanna, Shaikh
Faríd, Jaidev, Kabír, Námdeo, Pípá, Rámánand, Ravidas, Sadhna,
Sainu, Súrdás and Trilochant (whose lives are, for the most part, given
in the Bhaktamálá, or the North Indian 'Lives of the Saints') Kabir
and Tulsi Dás have had the greatest influence for good on the unedu.
cated classes of Northern and Central India.
A mystery hangs over Kabír's birth, but it appears that whoever
his parents may have been, he was brought up in a family of Musalman
weavers at Benares. He is generally looked on as having been a
weaver by caste, and the weavers of the country by a process well
known in eastern ethnology are fond of calling themselves the descend-
ants of this celebrated member of their caste. I Many of the Juláhás
in the Punjab return their caste as Kabírbansí, and many of those who
return their sect as Kabírbansí or Kabírpanthí, are pr bably little more
than ordinary weavers who have no idea of distinguishing themselves
from other Hindu weavers in matters of doctrine. However, Kabír:
whatever his caste may reall: have been, is said to have been a pupil
of Rámávand, and whether this be true or not, it is beyond doubt that
he imbibed a good deal of that master's teaching. From one point
of view the Kabírpaothís are merely Rámánandís who refuse to worship
idols.
In the 14th century Rámánand, the founder of the Bairágís, lived
at Benares. One day he went to gather flowers for worship in his
garded, but there he was seized and taken by the gardener's daughter
to one of the rulers of that period. The girl took with her also the
flowers which she herself had picked, and on the road found that they
had turned into a handsome child. Thinking Rámánand a wizard the
left both him and the child on the spot and fed homewards.
Rámánand then gave the child to a newly wedded Muhammadan
Juláhá and his wife who chanced to pass that way, and they brought
the boy up as their own sov.
Another version is that a Brahman's wife craved the boon of a son.
and used to do homage to her sadhu for one. But one day her hus.
band's sister went to do him reverence in her stead, and it was to her
that the sádhu granted the desired boon, thongh she was a virgin. On
learning this the sádhu declared himself unable to recall his gift, and
in due course a child was born to her from a boil which formed on her
hand when it was soratched by the rope at a well. In her shume she
*.See Kabir and the Knber Panth, by the Revd. G. H. Westcott, Cawnpore, 1907.
tiThis list is from Trompp's Religion der Sikhs, p. 67.
# The cou nection between wearing and religion in the Punjab is as interesting an that
between cobblicg and irreligion in England. There are some Alugulmon trittes (the
Khokhars, Chnghattas sod Chauhans for instance') who are found in many parte of the
Province performing indifferently the fr neticns of the weaper and the mallah.



418
The life of Kabír.
secretly cast the child into a stream, where it was found by a weaver
and his wife on their way home after their mukláwa. The child was
named Kabír, from kur, palm, and bír, a son, and one day his adoptive
mother took him to a tank to bathe. There too came Rámánand and
hurt the boy with his sandals, but when he began to cry, the saint
endowed him with miraculous powers. On his death Hindus and
Muhammadans disputed for possession of his body, so it was placed
under a cloth and when that was again removed it had disappeared.
Half the cloth was then burnt by the Hindus, and the other half
buried by the Muhammadans.
“In the midst of the dispute," says Professor Wilson, “Kabir
himself appeared amongst them, and desiring them to look under the
cloth supposed to cover his mortal remains, immediately vanished. On
obeying his instructions they found nothing under the cloth but a heap
of flowers." The Hindus took a half of them and burnt them at
Benares; the Muhammadans took the other half and buried them near
Gorakhpur, where his death is said to have occurred. Flower-born,
Kabír at his death turned to flowers again.
Kabír is in many ways rather a literary, than a religious, celebrity,
and his writings, in the common Bhásha, are very voluminous. The
Adi-Granth of the Sikbs is full of quotations from him, and he is more
often quoted there than any other of the Bhagats. His apothegms
are constantly on the lips of the educated classes, whether Aindu or
Musalopan, even at the present day; and possibly there is no native
author whose words are more often quoted than those of Kabír.
It is noticeable, too, that Kabír instead of impressing or his disciples,
like most Hindu leaders, the necessity of absolute adherence to the
Guru, was fond of stimulating enquiry and encouraging criticisms of
his own utterances.
Kabír was probably a Mubammadan Súfi,* but as a Súgi his teaching
was addressed to Hindus as well as Muhammadans. Wilson's descrip-
tion of the Kabírpanthí doctrines is still exact:-
"The Kabírpanthís, in consequence of their master having been a reputed disciple of
Rámánand and of their paying more respect to Vishoi than the other members of the
Hindu triad, ara always included among the Vaishnava sects and maintain, with most
of them, the Rámáwats especially, & friendly intercourse and political alliance. It is
no part of their faith, however, to worship any Hindu deity, or to observe any of the
rites or ceremonials of the Hindos, whether orthodox or schismatical. Such of their
members as are living in the world conform outwardly to all the usages of their tribes
and caste, and some of them even pretend to worship the usual divinities, although this is
considered as going rather further than is justifiable. Those, however, who have aban.
doned the fetters of society abstain from all the ordinary practices, and address their
homage chiefly in chanting hymns exclusively to the invisible Kabír. They use no
mantra por fixed form of salutation ; they have no pecaliar mode of dress, and some of
them go nearly naked, without objecting, however, to clothe themselves in order to appear
dressed when clothing is considered decent or respectful. The mahants wear a small scull
cap; the frontal parks, if word, are usually those of the Vaishnava sects, or tbey make
a streak with sandal or gopichandan along the ridge of the noso; a necklace and rosary of
tulot are also worn by them, but all these outward sigus are considered of no importance
and the inward mau is the only essential point to be attended to."
* According to Macauliffe (Sikh Religion, VI, p. 141), Kabír held the doctrine of
ahinsa or the duty of non-destruction of life, even that of Bowors. This doctrine would
appear to be due to Jain influences. Kabír is reputed to have had a son, Kamál, who
refused to look with favour on Hindus (Westcott, op. cit., p. 42; and who was thereupon
lost to bis father, thongb, according to Macauliffe, he lo believed by the Kabír-pan this to
bave boop re-apimated by Kabír.



Kabirpanthi-Kabirwáh.
419
It is however very doubtful if the view that Kabír was probably
a Muhammadan Súfi can be accepted with confidence, and Dr.
G. A. Grierson would regard the sect founded by Kabír as one of
the bhakti-sects. A common feature of many of those sects is the
maháparsáda or sacramental rneal. On the evening of the appointed
day the worshippers assemble and the mahant, or leading celebrant,
reads a brief address, and then allows a short interval for prayer and
meditation. All who feel themselves unworthy to proceed further then
withdraw to a distance. Those that remain approach the senior
celebrant in turn, and placing their hands together receive into the
palm of the right hand, which is uppermost, a small consecrated wafer
and two other articles of consecrated food. They then approach another
celebrant, who pours into the palm of the right hand a few drops of
water, which they drink. This ford and water are regarded as Kabír's
special gift, and it is said that all who receive it worthily will have
eternal life. Part of the sacramental food is reserved' and is carefully
kept from pollution for administration to the sick. After the sacra-
ment there is a substantial meal which all attend, and which in its
character closely resembles the early Christian love-feasts. It is possi-
ble that this rite was borrowed from the Jesuit missionaries at Agra,
but the head-quarters of the Kabirpanthi sect are at Benares, and
the rite is now likely to be a survival of historian influences. *
The Kabírpanthi sádhs or faqirs in this Province wear generally
clothes dyed with brickdust colour (gerú); and both they and the laiti
abstain from flesh and spirits. The present followers of Kabír hold
an intermediate position between idolatry and monotheism, but the
mission of Kabír himself is generally looked on as one directed against
idolatry; and at Kanwardeh, near Ballabgarh, in the Delhi district,
there is a community of Kabírpanthís descended from an Aggarwal
Bania of Puri, who used to travel with 52 cart-loads of Shivs and
Sáligrams behind him, but who was convinced by Kabír of the error
of his ways. The sect of Kabírpanthís is probably better known in the
Gangetic Valley than in the Punjab, and the Kabírpanthís are largely
found in the south-east of the Province; but considerable numbers ara
also returned from Sialkot and Gurdaspur, and it is said that the
Meghs and Batwals, so common in those districts, are very generally
Kabírpanthís. The sect is also very largely recruited from the Chamár
(leather worker) and Juláhá (weaver) castes, and it is open to men of
all classes to become Kabírpantbis. The Kabírpanthi will almost
always describe himself as a Hindu, but a certain number have
returned the name as that of an independent religion, and some as a
sect of the Sikhs.
An offshoot of the sect is the Dharm Dásíás, founded by a wealthy
merchant of Benares wbo turned súdhu. T'he Dharma Dásías, however,
appear to differ in no way from the Kabírpanthis in doctrine, and they
are very rarely found in the Punjab.+
Kabirwán, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Multán..
* J. R. A. S., 1907, p. 326. Dr. Grierson also calls attention to Kabir's doctrine of the
shabda or word which is a remarkable copy of the opeuing verses of St. John's Gosnel.
For an account of the Dharm Dás section see Mr. Westcott's book, p. 106,



420
Kachála-Kafir.
KachÁLA, a Ját clan (agricaltural) found in a solid group in Shujábád
tahsil, Multán district.
KACHELA, a Ját tribe, found in the Leghári Baloch country of Dera Ghází
Khan. It has adopted Balcoh mauners, customs and dress.
KACERA.- An occupational caste of glass-workers. The term is sometimes
applied to the CHÚRIGAR or makers of bracelets. The Kacheras in the
Báwal nizámat of Nábha are both Hinda and Muhammadan and claim
Rájput origin, e. g. their gots include Chauhans from Jaipur. They
were outcasted for adopting their present occupation and now inter-
marry, avoiding four gots, only among themselves. Their customs are
those of the Játs, with whom they can smoke, etc. They still worship
the well* after the birth of a son and it is again worshipped at weddings,
when the bride's father gives sharbat to the barát, an old Rájput
usage. Hindu Kachera women pever wear blue, because one of their
caste onca became sati. She is worshipped at all festivities, a cocoanut
being offered to her. The Kacheras' gurú is the mahant of a Bairagi
dehra at Bagwáșa in Jaipur, but they bave Brahman parohits.
Kácans, like the Lodhá, a well-known cultivating caste of Hindustáv, found
in the Punjab chiefly in the Jumna districts, though a few of thein
have moved on westwards to the great cantonments. Almost without
exception Hindus, they are said to be the market gardeners of Hindús-
tán, and of low standing. In the Punjab they are said to be generally
engaged in the cultivation of water-nuts and similar produce ; indeed
in mary parts they are called Sioghári (from singhára, a water-nut) as
commonly as Káchhi.
KACHORE, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KADAAR, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Kádián, a tribe of Játs, found in Karnál. It has its head-quarters at Siwa
and its original home was near Beri in Rohtak.
Rádiáni, or, more correctly, Ahmadiya. A föllower of the late Mirza Ghulam
Ahmad of Kádián in Gurdaspur. In 1900 in view of the approaching
census of 1901, the sect adopted the designation of Ahmadiya. The
founder of the sect was a Barlás Mughal, whose family came from
Persia in the time of Bábar and obtained a jágír in the present District
of Gurdaspur. Begioning as a Maulavi with a special mission to the
sweepers, the Mirza eventually advanced ciaims to be the Mahdi or
Messiáh, expected by Muhaminadaps and Christians alike. The sect
however emphatically repudiates the doctrine that the Mahdi of Islám
will be a warrior and relies on the Sahih Bukhari, the most authentic
of the traditions, wbich says ' he shall wage no wars, but discontinue
war for the sake of religion. In his voluminous writings the Mirza
combated the doctrine of jihad and the sect is thus opposed to the
extreme section of the Ahl.i-Hadís.
Karash-DOZ, an occupational group of the Muhammadan Mochis whe sew
shrouds.
Kárir.-The generic term bestowed by the Afgháns on the tribes which
occupy the large tract of country, called Kátristán, whicb lies between
of Kedirectly, Ahmea! Beri in Rohtas its head.
Siarilaspur
Bed eventually adans and char that the Mat
* All the relatives insemble under a canopy and drink sharbat on this ocoasion.



421
The Káfir septs.
Chitral, Afghánistán and the Hindú Kúsh. Kafir means simply
in del, and the Káfirs converted to Islám are styled Shaikhs, but
regarded by the Káfirs as still their kin.
Sir George Robertson* divides the Káfirs into Siáhposh or black-robed,
Waiguli and Presunguli or Viron and mentions a fourth tribe called
Ashkunt, as to whom little or nothing is known, though they are probably
allied to the Waigulis. The Presun, Waiguli and Ashkun are classed
as Safed posh or white-robed. The Siáh posh comprise 5 clans - Katir,
Mamún or Mádugál, Kashtán or Kashtoz, Kám or Kamtor and Istrat
or Gaurdesh. Of these the Katirs are probably more numerous than
all the remaining tribes of Káfiristán put together. They are sub-
divided : into the Kamor or Lutdebchis, in the Bashgul valley; the
Kti or Katwár of the Kti valley; the Kulam; and the Rámgulis or
Gabariks, the latter, the most numerous of the Kátir clans, being
settled in the west of Kafiristán on the Afghán frontier. The Kám
inhabit the Bashgulf and its lateral valleys. The Gaurdesh folk
are said to be very different from the other Siáh posh and to be, , in
great part, a remnant of an ancient people called Arom.
Of the Safedposh the Presun, who are called Viron by their Muham-
madan neighbours, inhabit the Presungul and are probably a very ar-
cient people, different from the Siáhposh on the one hand and the Wai
and Ashkun on the other. They are poor fighters and have patient,
stolid faces. Though heavy in their movements compared with other
Káhrs, they are very industrious and capable of great feats of endur.
ance. The Wai speak a language quite different to that spoken in
Presungul or by the Sikhposh and are a brave bigh-spirited race,
quarrelsome but hospitable. The Ashkun, half of whom are Muham-
madans, speak a language like the Wai dialect and are friendly to that
tribe though at war with all the others.
Another ancient race, the Jazhi, is said to exist at Pittiguls and
Gaurdesh, but from intermarriages with the Kám and others they cannot
now be distinguished from the Bashgul.
The clans are further sub-divided. Thus the Kám have 10 septs and
the Bashgul Katirs 7, including:
rUtahdári, which produces the
[ Jannahdári.
i tribal priests.---
,
Kám septs.
Barmodári.
Báshgul
Garakdári the two largest
to Shakldári.
| Bilezbedári ) septs.
(Demidári, the wealthiest sept.
Charedári, etc.
* The Káfirs of the Hindú-Kúsh: Ch. VII.
† P Yesbkun.
* The Rugbgali, a tribe of tbe Siáb posh Káfirs, are found in several small valleys on
tbe weetern side of the Swát and Panjkora valleys below Birkot and have been long
subject to Chitral.
Biddulph's division was : (i) the Rumgalis or Lumgalis in the upper valleys which
ron down south-west from the Hindu.kúsb till they come into contact with the Afgháng
of Kábul; (ii) the Waigalis, who hold the valleys which extend south-east from tbe
Hindu-kúsh and join the Kaner valloy : aod (iii) the Bushgalis who hold the valleys
wbich run from furtber north in a south-south-easterly direction and join the Kuner
valley at Birkot. The Waigalis alone have 18 clans. Besides these Biddulph mentions
the Kalashi, a broken clan, subject to Chitrál but claimed by the Bushgalis as their slaves.
and the Sufedposh, Kittigalis or Wirigalis. Biddulph, Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh, p. 126.
& Pittigul is a village which is remarkable for having a priest of its own, which no other
Kám village has, Moreover tbe Kámdesb utab or priest is not only a village, but also a
triba). functionary.
Katir septs
Mutadawadári.



the house is death boys of redresasionally and in the ined
422
The Káfir grades.
All the septs are closely connected, however, by marriage ties, as all
Kátirs are to a certain extent polygamous and marriage is prohibited
within one's own clan or those of one's mother and father's mother.
Nevertheless the sept always acts together as such without regard to
the marriage ties.
Each sept has one or more chief men to represent it, but some of them
are absolutely without weight in the tribal councils. In the more im.
portant septs these representatives are invariably jast or tribal head-
men and they are generally so in the minor clans.
Socially, a Káfir clan, such as the Kám, is divided into the following
grades :-
1. The mirs and priest.
2. The jast (elders or seniors), and ur jast.
8. Members of important septs.
4. Members of very small septs or groups of families.
5. Poor freemen, patsas or shepherds.
8. Slaves.
The family is the unit of the Káfir body politic and the importance
of a sept depends largely on the number of its families, just as the im-
portance of a family depends on the number of its adult males.
The head of the house is an autocrat in his own family, obeyed dur-
ing life and honoured after death by his descendants. A son rarely
opposes his father, though if hopeless of redress he may leave the clan
and turn Muhammadan for a while. But occasionally a son will be
supported by public opinion in a quarrel with his father, and in a case
where a man ran away with his own daughter-in-law, bis son obtained
eight-fold compensation. The father's authority naturally weakens as
· he grows old and he is succeeded as head of the family by his eldest
son (if not the son of a slave mother), but his authority over his brothers
is not very great and only lasts until partition of the family property
becomes inevitable.
In spite of their social gradations the Kátir clans are in theory demo-
cracies, but actually they are oligarchies and in some cases autocracies.
No individual can achieve importance until he become a jast.
Amongst the Kám to becoine a just takes three years* and involves
giving 21 feasts, 10 to the jast and 11 to the clan. Complicated cere.
monies also have to be gone through. Little boys may become jast,
though they will still be treated as boys.
A jast wears a woman's coronetted earrings in the upper part of the
ear and any gorgeous robes he can procure for religious ceremonies and
dances.
The feasts are most expensive and among the Kám many men utterly
ruin themselves in becoming jast and praise themselves for having
done so. To go through the ceremonies a man must have a female co.
adjutor,t but she is usually not his wife because the cost of giving a
* Or, among the Katirs, 2 years
+ The woman's only privilege is to wear márkhor or goat's hair round the top of her
dancing boots and to take part in the dancing, when on the completion of all the formuli.
ties, there is a ceremonial dance at a particular festival.



423
Káfir feasts.
double set of feasts would be too great. Two men therefore usually
arrange for one to go through the rites with the other's wife as his com-
panion and vice versá.
The initiatory rites are sacrifices of bulls and he.goats to Gísb, and the
animals are jealously scrutinised to see that they are up to standard.
The meat is divided among the people who carry it home. These
special sacrifices at the shrine recur at intervals, but the great slaughter.
ings take place at the feast-giver's own house, though on these occa-
sions too one or two goats are offered at the shrine of Gísh. Here, too,
the flesh is not eaten but taken home, only china cakes, cheese, salt and
wine being consumed on the spot. At the feast-giver's house, however,
flesh is eaten on certain days, but on others it is skewered together in
great heaps or portions for the guests to carry home, bread ghi, etc.,
being partaken of at his house.
The feasts given to the jasts alone are called mezhom and as the guests
are few in number, some he-goats and a bull suffice for a day's enter-
tainment. The feast-givers are known as kaneash and those who have
already completed their virtuous work are called sunajina.
Apart from the feasts, the kaneash undergo a complex ritual, which
becomes more and more complex as the time approaches when they
may don the earrings. At the sanaukan observance the kaneash is
the simulacrum of a man in that he closely resembles one of the decked
out effigies,' and Sir George Robertson thus describes the initiation of a
priest which he was invited to witness :-
" He had op a thick stumpy turban, having in front a fringe of cowrie shells strung
together with red glass beads, and furnished with a tail. A plume-like bunch of juniper.
cedar was stack in the front of this striking head-dress, between the folds of the cloth.
His ears were covered with a most complicated collection of earrings of all shapes and
sizes. About his neck was a massive wbite metal necklace, brass bracelets rudely stamped
with short lines and marks adorned bis wrists, while he had on his feet the ordinary
dancing-boots with long tops, ending in a markhor hair fringe. He wore a long blue
cottop tunic, reaching pearly to his knees, and the curiously worked black and white
nether garments made for these occasions at Shál in the Konár Valley. Perhaps the
most striking part of the costume was a Badakhshani silk robe of the usual gaudy pattern,
which was thrown negligently across the shoulders. In his hand was the daucing axe of
his fathers. He was bursting with pride and delight at his own appearance. After a
short interval, Utah (the kaneash) being unable to officiate as priest, a jast stepped
forward and acted as deputy. He bound a white cloth round his brows, took off his boots,
washed his hands, and began the night's proceedings by the sacrifice of two immense
billygoats, the largest I have ever seen, the size of young heifers. The sacrifice was cuu.
ducted in the usual way with the customary details. The special feature of the ceremony
was the dabbling of some of the blood on the forehead of Utah and on the forehead and
legs of his son Marak, who, seated opposite his father, was still weak and ill, for he was
only just recovering from swall-pox. For the boy, this proceeding meant that he might
thenceforth wear trongers. Besides the ordinary lour, bread, and ghi, placed by the re
ready for the sacrifice there were some enormous chapátis, aboct 15 inches ia diameter,
like those given to elephants in India. At this point these were lifted up, a sprig of
blazing juniper.cedar thrast in the centre, and they were th-n solemnly circled round
Utah's head three times and made to touch bis shoulders, while tbe deputy priest who
handled them cried' such' such!' The same thing was then done to the boy. After an in.
terval for refreshment there was dancing ; but just before they commenced, a visitor from
another village, Bragamatal, burst forth ipto panegyrics upon Utah and on his dead
father, and spoke of the immense amount of property which had been expanded on the
feast. This fulsome fattery was rewarded according to custom by the present of a lungi
or torban cloth, which was taken from the waist of the little boy, Utah's son, who was
scill suffering from the effects of small-poxThe fire was then take away and four of
five visitors were provided with turbans and dap cing boots, as well as scarves to wear oper
their shoulders or round the waist."



424
Káfir magistrates.
ances being dancers two latters' day by
This double rite of initiation was followed by dancing, the first three
dances being in honour of Gísh, and the next to Imrá, Dizane and other
deities. The dancers included visitors as well as the initiate's sister
and her daughter, the two latter being dressed in full dancing attire.
The sanaukun was completed next day by ceremoniously changing the
initiate's turban for a broad-brimmed crownless hat, into the front of
which a sprig of juniper was thrust. This changing of the head-dress
is called shara' ute. The kaneash initiated early in February were con.
sidered pure in their uniform which they wore till the spring, and the
greatest care was exercised to prevent their semi-sacred garments being
defiled by dogs.
A curious duty of a kaneash is to grow a miniature field of wheat in
the living-room of his house. With this no woman must have anything
to do, and it is remarkable as the only agricultural work done by tho
men,
Just in front and to the east of the tiny field is a flat stone and an
iron tripod, on which lie pine sticks ready for lighting. The whole
forms a miniature altar and before it is placed a stool with a flat piece
of wood as a footstool. Every evening the kaneash goes through the
following rite :-
• He seats himself on the stool and takes off bis boots, while some
friends or relations light the fire, bring forward a wicker basket piled up
with cedar branches, a wooden vessel containing water, a small wicker
measure with a handful of wheat grain in it and a large carved wooden
receptacle full of ghé. The kaneash, having washed his hands,
assumes the crowpless hat he must never be without except in his
own house, and begins by burning and waving about a cedar branch
while he cries, Such ! such !—be pure.'
He thrusts this into the water vessel before him, and then burns
a second branch completely, after waving it as before, and sprinkles it
with the now holy water.
He then proceeds to sprinkle the cedar branches, the fire, the ghi
vessel. Next he piles cedar branches on the fire, with a few wheat
grains and a handful of ghi, he begins his incantation while the
fames are dancing merrily and the smoke rolling upwards in clouds.
He pays tribute to all the gods in regular order, overy now and then
pausing to sprinkle and cast his offering on the fire, as at the begin.
ning.
The temperature of the room gradually grows terrific, for the ordinary
house fire is blazing on the hearth all the time. The scene altogether
is a strange one ; the walls of the room are frequently adorned with
grotesque figures painted in black on the clay-coloured ground. The
sprig of cedar worn in front of the hat shows that the wearer is an
ordinary notable who has become a jast. If he has gone through
the caremony before, he wears two sprigs of cedar. This is very rare
inde d.
The ur or urir jast is the chief of the ur or urir, 13 magistrates who
are all elected anpually, the other 12 being merely his assistants. As
a body it is their duty to regulate the amount of water which each
cultivator is to get from the irrigation channels and to keep them in



Káfir customs.
425
good order. Another duty is to see that no out picks or eats walnuts
or grapes before the appointed time--a rule relaxed in favour of
guests. Disobedience is punished by fines wbich are the urirs' per-
quisite and the only remuneration they receive. The urir jaxt also acts
as master of the ceremonies at all festivals and dances and has to light
the fire at the gromma every Wednesday (Agar) night. He is also the
official entertainer of guests. The urir are elected in the spring at the
Durban festival, after a bull has beec sacrificed to Gísh and some simple
rites. The ur jast receives all the flour not used in sacrifices, and
basketfuls of flour are also presented to him by the women on the last
day of each montb. In return he has to feast all comers for several
days on election, but on the whole his office is a lucrative one. It is
interesting to note that slaves can be elected members of the urir
provided they are not blacksmiths and are jast bari,* i. e., skilled
mechanics. Fines are imposed for making fun of the urir within 7
days after their appointment.
A form of adoption which is clearly akin to the milk-tie of Chitral is
practised in Káfiristán. A goat is killed, its kidneys removed and cooked
at a fire. A Káfir then places the adoptive father and son side by side
and feeds them alternately with fragments of the kidneys on the point
of a knife. At short intervals the pair turn their heads towards each
other and go through the motion of kissing with their lips a foot or so
apart. Then the adoptive father's left breast is uncovered, some butter
placed upon it, and the adopted son applies his lips to it. Adoption
of a brother is effected in precisely the same way, but the latter part
of the rite is omitted.
Murder, justifiable homicide and killing by inadvertence are all
classed as one crime for wbich the penalty is an extremely beavy blood.
ransom to the slain man's family, or exile combined with spoliation
of the slayer's property. The slayer at once takes to fight and be-
comes a chile (? chail) or outcast, for his sept will not aid him. His
house is destroyed and confiscated by the victim's clan, and his moveable
property seized and distributed, even if it is held joiutly with his rela-
tives. Their separate property is, however, exempt, nor is his family
deprived of his land. The chile is not compelled to leave his tribe, but
he must quit his village and always avoid meeting any of the family
or sept of the slain, though it suffices if he merely pretend to hide so
that his face may not be looked upon. His sons, if not grown up,
and his daughiers' husbands and their descendants, also become chiles,
and even Muhammadan traders who have married daughters of chiles
must behave like any other chile when they visit the slayer's village.
Several cities of refuge' are inbabited almost entirely by chiles, de-
scendants of the slayers of fellow-tribesmen. The chief of these is Mer-
grom. The shedding of blood may be atoned for by a heavy payment
in cash or in kind, but the amount is uncertain as it is rarely paid.
It is said to be 400 Kábnli rupees, and if paid reflects so much honour
on the slayer's family that its males are for ever afterwards permitted
to carry about a particular kind of axe.
• Bari is a slave and jast bari would appear to mean'a jast among the bari."



426
Ká fir beliefs.
Slaves (bari) form a curious and interesting class in Káfiristán.
All the craftsmen, such as the carpenters, dagger-makers, iron-workers
and weavers, are slaves, as are also tbose musicians who beat drums, but
the skilled mechanics, wood-carvers, boot-makers and silver-workers
are called jast-bari. Lowest of all are the blacksmiths. The slave
artisans live in a particular part of the village, work for their masters
with materials supplied them and get no wages; but if they work for
others they are entitled to keep the pay. These slaves are entirely self-
supporting. House slaves rank much higher than artisan slaves, live
with their masters, and are not treated harshly. Slaves are so impure
that they may not approach a god's shrine too closely nor enter a
priest's house beyond the doorway. They are always liable to be given
up to another tribe to be killed in atonement for a murder, as well as
sold, and their children are their master's property. They are how.
ever permitted, after giving certain feasts to the free community, to
wear the earrings of the jast, and this privilege exalts the wearer-at
least among the slave community. Moreover a master and slave oc-
casionally become adoptive brothers. Slaves adopt all the customs of
the rest of the community, and give feasts at funerals and on other
great occasions. Neither sex has any distinctive badge, but they are
recognizable by their phrsiognomy, being low-browed, very dark-
complexioned, but of powerful build. The bondsmen are just as pat-
riotic as the rest of the community. There is but little traffic in slaves,
as they are not sold unless their owner becomes very poor indeed; but
female children of slave parents are sold to the neighbouring Muham.
madan tribes, who are thereby enabled to make converts to Islám.
Children born to a Káfir by a slave mother would appear to be free, but
of very low status. The slaves also are accorded a semi-divine origin,
as the following narrative shows:-
“It appears that one day up in the sky a father blacksmith said to
his son, 'Bring me some fire.' Just as the lad was obeying the order,
there was a lightening flash, and the boy fell through the slit thus
caused in the floor of the sky on to the earth. From this youth one
portion of the slave population is derived, the remainder being the
offspring of Waiguli prisoners, taken in war. Of the Precun the
following account was given me. In the beginning of the world God
created a race of devils. He soon afterwards regretted having done so.
but felt Himself unable to destroy all those He had so recently endowed
with breath. But Moní (sometimes called Muhammad by Kafirs,
under the impression that prophet and Muhammad are synonymous
terms) grieving at the terrible state of affairs, at length obtained a
sword from Imrá, and was given permission to destroy all the devils.
He killed very many, but seven, the ancestors of the Presuns of to-day,
managed to escape bim."
Káfir theology dịvides the world into Urdesh, 'the world above,' the
abode of the gods : Míchd-sh, the earth; and Yurdesh, the nether
world. Both the heaven and hell for mortals are in Yurdesh, which is
reached by a great pit, at whose mouth sits Maramalik, the custodian
created by Imrá for this duty. Be permits no one to return. At
death a man's breath or soul (shon) enters a shadow form, such as we
see in dreams, and it then becomes a partir. The good appear to



Káfir marriage.
427
wander about in Bisht, a paradise in Yurdesh, while the wicked burn
in Zozuk,* 'hell,' Káfirs have no great fear of death, but suicide is
to them inexplicable.
Presungul is pre-eminently a religious tract. Devils' villages abound,
the old water-courses are believed to have been built by the deities;
miraculous hand-prints are shown on rocks, and much reverence is paid
to Imrá.
Káfir marriaget is a very simple business, being indeed merely a
bargain whereby the wife is purchased of her parents. When the price
has been settled a goat is killed, there is some feasting and the marriage
is completed. But the wife is not allowed to leave her parents' house
until the full price has been paid and girl-children born to her there
would certainly belong to her family. It is not certain, bowever, if
son3 would not belong to the father. It is payment of the full price
which gives the husband a right to take his wife home to work in the
fields.
Girls are generally married before puberty and indeed infants are
sometimes affianced to grown men. A girl of 12 who is unmarried
must be of hopelessly bad character. On the other hand, young and
even middle-aged women are sometimes married to boys, for an orphan
lad who owns land inust marry in order to get it cultivated.
All well-to-do Káfirs have more than one wife but rarely more than
4 or 5, and it is a reproach to have only one wife. The price paid de
pends on the suitor's status, a poor man paying Rs. 8 and one fairly
well-to-do, Rs. 12. A Káfir takes over his dead brother's wives. to
keep or sell as he deems fit. Divorce is easy as a man can always sell
a wife or send her away. When a woman elopes with another man, the
husband tries hard to get an enhanced price for her.
or as ons, but the eleman's death obaleno
Women are regarded as chattels and can therefore hold no property.
even in themselves. Accordingly on a man's death his property is
divided equally among his sons, but the eldest son gets a single article
of vague such as a cow or a dancing robe over and above his share.
while the youngest inherits his father's house. The inheritance is
strictly confined to legitimate sons by free mothers, and slaves sops get
nothing. If there be only a very young son the brother would practia
cally do as he chose with the property, provided he feasted the clan
lavishly out of it. A son may also dispose of or even marry his
stepmothers, and his mother too is often remarried, her price probably
going to her son. Failing near male agnates, the estate goes to
the more remote and, failing them, to the sept. It never goes to
daughters or to relatives by marriage as it migbt then go out of the
clan altogether.
Káfir religion is described by Sir George Robertson as a somewhat
low form of idolatry, mixed with ancestor worship and some traces of
fire worship. The difficulties of getting information were however great
* Clearly the Pers, dozakh, hell.
+ For birth customs see p. 433 infra.



428
12.
13.
The Ráfir pantheon.
and in Presungul the people objected to his being showu their gods
at all. The principal gods and goddesses are :-
1. Imrá.
9. Duzhi.
2. Moní.
10. Noug.
3. Gísh.
11. Paráde.
4. Bagisht,
Shomde.
Arom.
Saranji or Sauranju)
6. Tauru,
14. Dizade
7. Satarám or Sudaram.
15. Nirmali
goddossos.
8. Inthr.
16. Krúmai or Shumai)
Imrá is the creator. By his breath he created his prophets,' Moni,
Gísh, etc., but Dizane sprang from his right breast. Placing her on his
palm Imrá threw her violently upwards into a lake where she was hid.
Bagisht alone was born in mortalvise to Dizane.* Besides his propbets
Imrá also created seven daughters who watch over agriculture and as
sowing-time approaches goats are sacrificed to them for ample crops.
Imrá also created fairies and demons, but the latter gave so much
trouble that Moni had to be permitted to exterminate them, One be
destroyed by secretly withdrawing seven screws or plugs from his body
so that he fell to pieces.
For the legends and myths which gather round Imrá the reader
must be referred to Sir G. Robertson's book, but one deserves special
potice. It relates how Inthr had made Badáwan his resting place and
there created vineyards and pleasances, but Imrá suddenly claimed it
as his. In the fight that ensued Imrá drove him from place to place
until he bad to abandon the Bashgul valley and take refuge in
Teárogul.
Frequent sacrificest are made to Imrá, sometimes for recovery from
sickness, seasonable weather or other material benefits ; sometimes
from motives of simple piety. He is not more honoured than the other
gods at the religious dances, and though he receives three-rounds there
is none of the enthusiasm which is displayed for Gísh. Possibly Imrá
was once chiefly worshipped and he probably still retains his ascendancy
in Presungul, where his principal temple is found though he bas.
temples in every village, and they are also met with far from any
dwelling. In Presungul his great temple, at Kstitigrom, the most
sacred village in all Kafiristán, is an imposing structure, elaborately
ornamented. On its east side is a square portico, as spacious as the
temple itself, supported on carved wooden pillars which form a kind
of rough colonnade. The carving is of three types, a favourite one
being two rows of rams' heads, one on each side of the pillar, es-
tending from top to base: another consists in an animal's head carved
at the base from which the horns extend, crossing and recrossing each
* The birth of Bagisht happened in this wise : In a distant land in the middlo of a lake
grow a large tree-so great that it would have taken 9 years to climb it and 18 to
journey from one side of its spread to the other. Sataram became enamoured of it, but,
when he approached, it burst asunder disclosing Dizane and he fled in consternation.
Dizane emerged and began to milk goats, but was ravished by a demon who had four
oyes, two in front and two behind. To her was born Bagisht in a swift-flowing Presungul
river whose waters parted to allow the child to step ashore unaided. On his way down
the stream he met a stranger and learnt that he was named Bagisht. Another story is
that Divane was the trunk of the sacred tree and Nirmali its roots: the tree had seven
branches, each a family of seven brothers.
+ Cows are commonly sacrificed to Imrá throughout Káfiristán.



Káfir gods.
429
other at intervals and ending in points, between which a grotesque face
appears; and the third is the common basket pattern. Under this
portico many sacrifices are made. The effigies of Imrá are in wood carved
in relief. The figures are about 7 feet high and represent the god seated
and working a goat-skin churn. The face of each is prodigious. The
square-cut chin reaches within a hand's breadth of the goat-skin on the
god's knees. The brow and nose are, in the majority of the figures,
scored with lines, while those on the two practicable doors have rough
iron bells suspended between the eyes. The goat-skin churns are re-
presented as caryed all over. Above the faces of the images a large
circular head-dress appears, with a horizontal line of carving across the
middle, and vertical cuttings running upwards and downwards from it.
Between several of the figures there are vertical rows of what appear
to be intended for cows' or rams' heads.
From one of these rows the heads can be drawn out of their sockets,
and the glories of the interior be partially disclosed. Above the big
images is a board ornamented with small figures and horns. On the
outer side of the temple, to the north, are five colossal wooden figures
which help to support the roof. On the south side the ornamentation is.
almost entirely confined to the upper part of the wall, which consists of
a series of carved panels. On the west there is little or no attempt at
ornamenů of any kind.
Moni ranks next to Imrá in the Káfir pantheon and is called the
prophet. He always appears as the god selected to carry out
Imra's behests. He has a temple in almost every village, and in
Presungul, where he retains his rightful position, two small patches of
glacier several miles apart are called his marks and said to be the
places where he stands to play aluts (quoits). Once Modi found
himself in Zozuk (hell) and had to be rescued by an eagle.
Gísh or Great Gísh is by far the most popular god of the Bashgul
Káfirs aod every village has one or more shrines dedicated to him.*
He is the war-god and as a man was a typical Kátr. Some say his
earthly name was Yazíd, and he is reported to have killed Ali, Basan
apd Husain and nearly every famous Musalman known to the Káfirs.
Countless bulls and he-goats are sacrificed to him, and for 15 days
in spring slaves beat drums in his honour.
To the east of Kámdesh village is a very sacred spot with a temple
to Gísh, fitted with a door which is removed for a limited period each
year. Poles project upwards from three of its corners and two of
them are crowned with caps, one of iron, another of mail, the spoil
of a foray; while the third is hung round with a bunch of rude,
tongueless bells, which are carried about at some festival.t Immedi-
ately facing this shrine is a similar, but smaller, one dedicated to Moni,
and this is occupied by three stones in a row, the middle and largest
of which is worshipped as Moni.
Presuppe over the standen med had to be
end Husain and as Lazíd, and he was a typichrines dedicate Bashgul
less bulls andarly every fams reported to Káfr. Sated to himet
Come One is tempted to identify Gís' with Kțishna who appears as Gisane in Arminian. But
if Gísh be Krishna at all, he is clearly the elder Krishna.
of This is also done in spring during the period while slaves beat drums in his honour
and for four additional days. They are then carried about by an inspired priest on three
rings, 6" in diameter, three bells on each ring.



430
Káfir priests.
During this period of spring alluded to above the door of the temple
of Gísh remains open, the door being replaced early in July. For
10 days in September drums are beaten morning, noon and night in
his honour. Every raid, in which an enemy has been successfully killed,
terminates in the heroes of it dancing at the gromma in honour of
Gísh, Only male animals, such as bulls and he-goats are offered to
Gísh. Certain smooth holes in rocks are often pointed out as his cannon.
The god however appears to be less admired in Presungul than he is
among the Siáh-posb.
Bagisht is a popular deity who presides over rivers, lakes and
fountains, and helps good men in the struggle for wealth and power.
He appears to have no temples, but three celebrated places are the
scenes of his worship and others are sacred to him. Sheep, and
occasionally goats, are sacrificed to him.
Arom* is the tutelary god of the Kám Káfirs and his little shrine
resembles one of the ordinary effigy pedestals. At the close of a war
the animals which ratify the treaty are sacrificed at his shrine.
He had seven brothers. When the time comes for the kaneash to cast
aside their distinctive garments, a part of the ceremonial consists in
sacrificing a he.goat to Arom. Satarám or Sudaram is the weather
god and regulates the rainfall.
Dizane is a popular goddess and the Giché or new year festival is
held entirely in her honour. She also has special observances during
the Dizanedu holidays. She takes care of the wheat crop and to
increase its culture simple offerings, without sacrifice, are made to
her. In Presungul a great irrigation channel is attributed to her and
a good bridge is called by her name. While the men are away on a
raid the women dance and sing praises to the gods, especially to
Dizane. Some say she was Satarám's daughter, and she may have been
originally the goddess of fruitfulness. She usually shares a shrine
with other deities, but at Kámdesh she has a pretty shrine, built by
men brought from Presungul for the purpose. It has the wedge-
shaped roof common in that tract and is covered with carving. The
poles, which are fixed along both sides of the sloping roof, support
wooden images of birds, said to be pigeons.
Nirmali is the Káfir Lucina, taking care of women and children and
protecting lying-in women; the pshars or women's retreats are under
her special protection.
Krumai lives on the sacred mountain of Tirich Mír and is honoured
by a comical dance which always winds up the performances at the
regular ceremonies when each important deity is danced to in turn,
The religious functionaries are the utah or high priest, the debilála
who chants the praises of the gods, and the pshur, who is temporarily
inspired during religious ceremonies and on other occasions. All the
utahs are greatly respected and in Presungul there is one to each
village, some of the elders among them being men of great sanctity.
All are wealthy and have certain privileges. An utah may not visit
cemeteries, use certain paths which go near receptacles for the
dead or enter a room where a death has occurred until the effigy has
been erected. Slaves must not approach his hearth.
* For the ancient race of this name see p. 421.



n front of of the 17th to come the night iss
Káfir festivals.
481
The debilála is also debarred from using certain impure pathways.
The pshurs appear to be more or less conscious impostors.
The kaneash also are considered pure and can, at some sacrifices,
perform the utah's duties.
Festivals.-(i) The Giché or new year's day is called the Káfir Id
by their Muhammadan neighbours and appears to fall about January
16th. All men who have had sons born to them during the past year
sacrifice a goat to Dizane, and the night is spent in feasting. Early in
the morning of the 17th torches of pinewood are deposited in a heap
in front of the shrine of that goddess and the blaze is increased by
throwing ghi on the fire.
(ii) The Veron follows about the 3rd February and the urir enter.
tain the whole village. It is quite a minor festival.
(iii) The Taska falls about February 18th. Small boys are encouraged
to abuse grown men and snowball fights take place. On the 20th there
is a great dance in the afternoon at the gromma, attended by the
kaneash in their robes and by all the jast in gorgeous attire. Gísh is
principally honoured, and all the religious functionaries are also
present. In the evening a subdued revel called the prachi nát (dance)
is held at the gromma, but only boys of the lower orders appear to
indulge in it.
The day following is devoted to throwing an iron ball, called shíl.
This is thrown by the young men and the victor has the privilege of
feasting the village. The contest appears to be in honour of Imrá.
who made the ball when he created the world.
(iv) The Marnma, falling about March 8th, is essentially a women's
festival. On the preceding evening they cook rice and bread, small
quantities of which are placed early on the 8th, with ghi and wine in
frunt of the family effigies. The offerings are then washed away by
gushes of water from a goat-skin. The women next proceed to the
pshar, where they feast and amuse themselves with loud laughter.
On their way home they exchange indelicate chaff with the men, who
offer them necklets or other small articles to be danced for. Near
each house a small portion of prepared food is placed on the ground
in the name of every deceased relative who can be remembered and
this too is swept away by water. The food left over is then feasted on.
(v) The Duban is the great festivity of the year, lasting 11 days
from about March 19th-29th. It has an elaborate ceremonial, but
its chief features are dancing, processions and the antics of the buffoon
to be has the called she
prie
(vii The Azhindra, on April 6th, is solemnised by a procession to
the upright stones which form the shrines of Bagisht and Duzhi
The kaneash are allowed to leave the village for this occasion.
Games of aluts and foot-races are its principal features, but Bagisht
is also honoured by a bull sacrifice and recitations.
(vii) The Diran, about May 9th, is a festival of purification. A
regular procession goes to Iporá's teraple. the priest sprinkling water



432
Káfir festivals.
on its members with a sprig of juniper. A cow is sacrificed to
Imrá, and baskets full of flour, with a bread-cake shaped like a rosette
on top, are placed before the shrine. Then the assembly moves a
little to the north, and a goat is sacrificed to Bagisht at his distant
shrine, the idea being that the sacrifice is offered through the air.
A display of archery follows.
(viii) The Gerdulau falls about June 5th and appears to be of
secondary importance.
(ix) The Patilo, about the 30th of June, is celebrated by pictaresque
dancing at night in honour of Imrá.
(w) The Dizapedu, falling on July 9th, merits a full quotation of
Sir George Robertson's account: “For two days previously," he
writes, “men and boys had been hurrying in from all sides bringing
cheeses and ghi. Every pshal or dairy farm contributed. At two
o'clock the male inhabitants of Kámdesb went to Disnne's shrine
to sacrifice a couple of goats, and make offerings of portions of cheese
and bread-cakes.
ke wakoreight into portions, sroups, scales
Then the whole company returned to Gísh's temple. An immense
pile of fine cheeses was heaped upon the wooden platform close by, and
from each one a shallow circular fragment was cut out. The convex
pieces were plaved on the cedar branches with bread-cakes and ghi
during a regular worship of Gísh.
This ceremony over, the people collected into groups, scales were
produced, and all the cheeses were cut into portions. Each share was
weighed separately, the wake-weights being neatly skewered on to
the big pieces with little bits of stick. While this was being done
the goat's flesh, divided into “messes”, was being cooked in two
large vessels, the green twigs used to bind together the different
sharos simmering away merrily with the meat. Women brought
bread from the different houses, and ultimately stood in a row in the
background, while their male relations thoroughly enjoyed themselves.
There was a regular religions ceremony performed by Utah, and just
before this began, Shahru, the mad priest, at the invitation of the
oldest of the Mirs, replaced the shutter which closed the tiny door
or window of Gísh's temple. This shutter had remained on the top
of the shrine ever since Shahru had removed it early in the year.”
(xi) The Munzilo, held about August 17th, appears to be mainly
devoted to the final ceremonies for the kaneash. It lasts several days.
Gish and Dizane are chiefly honoured.
(xii) The Nilu festival begins late on the evening of September 17th.
and on the 18th boys of 6 to 12, the only performers, collect about
4 pm. and are dressed in gala costumes. After they have
danced, Imrá is worshipped, without a sacrifice, and a fire lit. On the
19th the men dance and songs are chanted in honour of Gísh, Dizane
and otber deities. The proceedings close with a dance to Krumai.
This is the last festival of the year,



Káfir games.
433
Birth customs.
When delivery is imminent the woman goes to the Nirmali house*
and remains there for 20 days if the child is a girl, or 21 if it is a
boy. After a ceremonial ablution she then returns home, but is
allowed a further rest of 12 days there. The instant a child is born
it is given to the mother to suckle and an old woman names all its
ancestors or ancestresses, as the case may be, and stops the moment
it begins to feed. The name on her lips at that moment is the child's
for life. Suckling continues for two or three years.
Boys may not wear trousers till they have been taken to Dizane's
shrine at the Giché festival, dressed in that garb of manhood, and
sacrifice has been made there. This is followed by a feast. The sons
of poor men are often associated in this observance with boys who
are better off. Boys who take part in the sanaukan of a kaneash
are exempt from further observances.t
Games.-Games play an important part in Káfir life. With one
exception boys and girls play separately, the former playing rough
games. One is played by four boys on each side, each player holding
a big toe with the opposite band and hopping on the other foot. The
object is to enable the 'back’ to get through to the other side's
goal. The game is played with wonderful pluck and good temper.
Shooting arrows, rough and tumble fighting and pitching walnuts are
the less violent amusements. Girls play at ball, knuckle-bones (in
which walnuts are however used) and swinging. The only game
played by girls and boys together is an imitation of the national
dance. Men play a kind of touch, in which the object is to tread
on a man's insiep to make him prisoner, archery, aluts, which is a
kind of quoit, played with flat stones and various athletic exercises.
The stone-bow is used by both men and boys and exactly resembles
the Indian gulel. A fairly popular game is a kind of curling with
walnuts on the house-tops.
No game, however, plays so important a part as dancing. Káfirs
dance when they are happy and when in mourning. They dance to
'amuse the injured, the sick and the dying, but possibly this is really
done as a form of supplication to the gods, who are propitiated by
songs, dancings and feasting, which includes sacrifices, and never in any
other way. The chief occasions for dancing are the dances of the
jast to the gods, those to the illustrious dead, those performed by the
womon to the gods while the men are raiding, those of homicides to
Gísh, at a Kafir's death and on the erection of effigies. These dances
are performed inside the gromma or dancing-place which is thus
described by Sir G. Robertson :-
“ The dancing-place is always the most important spot in a Káfir
village. There is usually only one, but Kámdesh and Bragamatál
* Or pshar, It is always placed on the outskirts of the village, or even outside it, and is
a low, square apartment, in whose construction very little wood enters. In the Bashgul
valley it is also distinguished by two or three sheep-skins fastened to a pole and stuck on the
roof. Elsewhere it may be the merest bovel, half underground, yet incompletely sheltered:
In Presungul the pshar may be separated from the village by a river, but it is much better
built and consists of two or three rooms in a line, the doors all facing the water, if it is on a
river-bank; and the sheep-skins are not in vogue.
† For marriage customs, see p. 427 supra,



434
Káfir dances.
have two each. A dancing-place should consist of a house to be
: used in winter and in bad weather, a boarded platform, and a level
piece of ground, on which particular dances are performed, furnished
with a rude stone altar. A description of the upper Kámdesh dancing.
place will also apply, with some modifications to all similar places
in the Bashgul valley.
The whole place is called the gromma, a name evidently derived
from the word grom or brom, the Bashgul term for a village. A
Kafir who had been to India with me always called the gromma the
"church” when he spoke Urdu. To the north of the Kámdesh
dancing-place is the gromma or dancing-house.
It is 12 feet high, 35 long and 30 broad. Its sides are barred, not
closed, by heavy square beams, between the intervals of which
spectators can thrust their heads and shoulders restfully.
During a spectacle these apertures are generally crowded with
the h ads of girls and women. Down the centre of the gromma run
two rows of massive pillars which support the heavy roof. They
are about six feet apart. The central four are quite plain, except at
the top, where they are ornamented with carved horses' heads. The
remaining four are completely covered with the ordinary basket-work
carving. In the middle of the roof there is a four feet square smoke-
hole. Bordering the gromma to the south is the largest level space in
the village. It is about thirty yards square. On it there is a rude
altar, formed of two upright stones, with a horizontal one on top.
On this altar there is almost always to be seen the remains of a recent
fire. To the east this space is continuous with a platform, which is
carried out from the steep slope and maintained in that position by
wooden pillars and beams. It looks, and is, a shaky structure. A
railing runs round its three dangerous sides. Seats are provided on it
in the shape of long planks of comfortable breadth, a few inches off the
floor. These platforms are always to be seen if the village is built on
the side of a hill. Most of the shrines at Kámdesh are provided with
a platform which only differs from that at the gromma in point of size.
In villages built on the flat, such as those in the upper part of the
Báshgul valley, the platforms are lifted off the ground on trestles.
They are indeed an essential part of every dancing-place, because
certain ceremonies cannot be performed except upon them.
The gromma of a Presun (Viron) village differs considerably from
those of the Báshgul valley. In the first place, they are nearly all of
them half underground, that at Digrom, for example, is like a huge
bear-pit and is reached by long passages sloping down from the vil-
lage level. They are very large, as they are used for guest-houses,
and are capable of holding a large number of people. In one corner
they generally have a small shrine, containing a quaintly carved idol
of some god. The four central pillars are hewn into marvellously
grotesque figures, the huge shield-shaped faces of which are more
than two feet in length. The arms are made to hang from the line of
the brows, while, if a goddess is represented the long narrow breasts,
which look like a pair of supplementary arms, start from between the
arms and the brows. There is never any doubt, however, about the
the sex of an effigy of this kind. The knees of the figure are made
OULU



Kafsh-doz-Kahút.
435
to approach one another, while the feet are far apart, as if, indeed,
the god or goddess was swarming up the pole backwards.”
KAFSH-DOZ (Pers.) a boot-sewer: see under Mochi.
Kanár, fem. -í, -Ní, a synonym for Jaíwar. The Kahár is also styled
Mahra, and in Ferozepur at least settles all his disputes in a
caste ranchayat. Curiously enough the Mohammadan Kahár retains
the cult of the water-god Khwaja Khizr, which the Jhíwar also affects.
On the Jumna he worships the Khwája, repeating his name and that
of Hanuman every night and morning to keep himself safe for the
ensuing twelve hours. They call themselves the bálká or children of
the Kbwája. The Gharuk sub-caste of the Kahárs, however, claim
descent from the Kauravas and never bathe in the Kurukshetr.
KAHDAR, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery..
Kenl, a tribe of Játs, which in Ludhiana observes the jhandi rite at weddings.
A loaf 14 mans in weight is also cooked and of this į man goes to a
Bharai, the rest being distributed among the kinsmen.
· Kahlon, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and other districts,
especially in Siálkoț. They claim descent from Rája Vikramajít of the
Lunar race, through Rája Jagdeo of Dáránagar, concerning whom they
tell the well-worn legend that in his generosity he promised his sister
whatsoever she might ask. She claimed his head and he fulfilled
his promise, but was miraculously restored to life. His descendant in
the 4th generation Kahlwán gave his name to the tribe. Fourth from
him came Soli or Sodi under whom they left Dáránagar and settled
near Batála in Gurdaspur, whence they spread into Siálkot. Muham-
madan Kahlons perform the nikáh, but they also observe Hindu
observances at a wedding and when the procession sets out they go to
a chhari or malha tree outside the village. There a lamp is lighted in
an earthen vessel and a thread tied round a branch of the tree. The
bridegroom then cuts off the branch with a sword and puts it in the
vessel.* Its jathera is Bába Phul Johad.
KAHLÚRía, of Kahlúr,' one of the Simla Hill States. A Hindu Rajput sept
of the 1st grade, found in Hoshiarpur.
Káron, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Multán.
KAHÚT, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur, Gujrát, Ráwalpindi.
Hazára and Jhelum. They give their name to the Kabúta hills of Ráwala
pindi (now held by the Ketwál and Dhaniál) and to the town of Kahúta.
now a Janjúa possession. Their present head-quarters are found in thé
Salt Range and give its name to the Kahútáni ilága of Chakwal tahsil.
They now declare that they were originally located in Arabia, and are
Qureshis, the present tribal name being merely that of their common
ancestor: 24 generations ago, about the year A. D. 1359 their ancestor
Said Nawab Ali migrated to 'Delhi, in the reign of “Firoz Shah.
Ghori”; (Firoz Tughlaq, son of Muhammad Tughlaq, is no doubt
meant; he reigned from 1351 to 1388 A. D.): on the way to Delhi
* They are said to avoid saying 'bas' (enough) whilo a wedding party is eating in the
bride's house.



438
Kaimal-khel-Káith.
they fought and conquered a pagan king of Sialkot, vamed Sain Pál,
who was, they say, probably a Dogļa prince. On reaching Delhi they
paid their respects to the king who ordered them to hold the Dhanni
and the Salt Range on his behalf: under the leadership of Kahát, the son
of Nawab Ali, they accordingly retraced their steps to this district, and
settled first at Gagnelpur, of which the ruined site is shown in Mauza
Wariamál near the foot of the Salt Range : here they remained for
some time, realising the revenue from the Janjúas of the hills and the
Gujar graziers of the Dhanni, and remitting it to Delhi. The Máirs
and Kassars had not then arrived in these parts, but came six or seven
generations afterwards. The eastern Dhanni was then a lake, which
on the coming of Bábar was drained at his command, the Kahúts taking
part in the work and colonising the land reclaimed. Chaudhri Sahnsár,
8th in descent from Kahút, was their ancestor in the time of Bábar.
They have no peculiar customs, except that the males of the tribe
never wear blue clothes, or, if they do, fall ill: this is ascribed to the
vow of a sick ancestor. The tribe is not divided into clans. They in-
termarry to some extent with Máirs and Kassars, and now and then with
Awáns, both giving and taking daughters : but usually marry within
the tribe.* The remarriage of widows is permitted, but is not custom-
ary in gooit families: where it is allowed, it is not necessary that the
widow should marry her deceased husband's brother.
The mirásis of the tribe give some of the usual rhymes: one relates
to the passage of Bábar through Kallar Kahár, the first two lines being
as given by the Kassar mirásís, with the addition of a third, Kahút
potre Abú Tálab de awwal a'e: but the latter does not hang well to-
gether with what precedes it: the Abu Talab referred to was the uncle
of the Prophet. Another runs : Kahút charhiá Dihlion sat már nagáre :
chår hazár bhirá aur kammi sáre : Kahút Dhoni surkhrú hoiá : sunniá
chandal sáre. Dhoná is the name of a Kahút leader, they say. A
third is a war song relating to fights of the Kahuts with the Janjúas.
Like the Máirs and KASSARS they seem to have been ever violent and
masterful, and to have retained their independence in a singular degree,
but though they differ little in character and appearance from those
tribes it is doubtfal whether they are of the same stock. Though they
may be regarded as Rájputs by status they do not appear to have ever
claimed Rájput descent and indeed their bards claimed for them Mughal
origin.
KAIMAL-KHEL, see under Hatikhel.
KÁIM-MAKÁM, see Qáim-makám.
KATH, BAITH, fem. Kitalání, -ní, -rání. KÁNITE, fem. -í, -NÍ, -IÁNÍ, KÁYATĖ,
KAYASTH (a).- In the Kangſa hills the kaitht is an accountant.
* But they do not marry with Qureshis, and are entirely agricultural or employed in
Goverument service. They rank a little below the Máirs and Kassars, but occasionally inter-
marry with them.
With the characteristic Indian tendency to define status in terms of origin by birth
shoname of Kaith in the Punjab hills is said to be applied to members of a mixed caete
Formed by the intermarriage of Rrahmaps and Káyaths proper and even of Bánias who follow
Warkly pursuits. Their casta would be Mahájan (Pabári) and their occupation káith. Mr.
Bornes said: “The Káyath of the hills is not identical with the Kayath of the plains. He
"helongs to the Vaisya or commercial class and is entitled to wear the janeo or sacred
on thread. The Káyath of the plaids is a Súdra, and is not entitled to assume the janeo."
In Bashahr the káyath is a temple servant,



Kajlá-Kákar.
437
In the plains the Kayath or Kayasth is a caste- the well-known
writer class of Hindustán. A full account of the caste and of its
origins, which are fiercely disputed, would be beyond the scope of this
article, but it msy be noted that the Kayasthas say that they sprang
from the body of Brahma who by virtue of his ascetic powers gave
birth to a son named Chitra Gupta.* This son he bado go to Dharam-
puri, serve Yáma Rája, and make the people of the world fulfil their
karma. His descendants are known as Kuyasthas or Káyáka Sthán.t
By Rája Manu's daughter Chitrá Gupta had four sons, Mathar, Bhat-
nágar, Saksena and Sribástana. By Sugarman Rishi's daughter he
had eight sons, Nigam, Anshat, Gaur, Karam, Bálmík, Unáyá, Kül,
Sarsat and Suraj Dhaj. The 12 groups of the Kayasthas are named
after these 12 sons. But all 12 are not represented in the Punjab. In
Jind for instance only four are found, viz., Mathar, Bhatnagar, Saksena
and Srivastana. As a rule they mix freely but in some places Srivas-
tana and Saksena do not smoke from the same hukka or eat kachchi roti
together. They form one endogamous group. In Jind they are chiefly
of the Kashyab gotra, but some families belong to the Bhats and one or
two other gotras. In all the groups there are sub-groups (als) named
after places, so that there are 84 als in the 12 groups. Two als, vix.
those of the father and mother, are avoided in marriage.
Karewa is never allowed and polygamy very rarely practised.
Kayastha marrying a female of a kúf or tribe below him in the social
scale is usually excommunicated. But the extreme step is not taken if.
tbe woman be of good family and he strictly abstains from eating
kachchi roti prepared by her. Children born of such unions are married
to persons of similar status. Marriages are generally performed at
mature age and great attention is paid to a boy's education.
The Kayath is not indigenous in the Punjab, and is found in de-
creasing numbers as we go westwards. He is only to be found in the
administrative or commercial centres and is being rapidly displaced, so
far as Government service is concerned, by Punjábi clerks. His origin
is discnesed in Colebrook's Essays.
KAJLÂ, a landless nomad tribe of the Northern Bár in the Gujranwala district,
KATLÁN. a Ját tribe found in Jírd and Hissár. It claims descent from
Kaila, a Chauhan Rajput who married an Ahír widow by karewa and
thus became a Ját.
KÁKÁKHEL, see Sayyid.
Kákar, a branch of the Parni Afgháns.
Kirare one of the Pathán tribes which hold the Koh-i-Sial or
black range', i. e. the Sulaimán range. It occupies the elevated
plateau of Bora, which is described as extensive, well-watered, fertile
and carefully cultivated, and other tracts. The valleys between Bora and
* Chitrá Gupta means concealed like a picture. Brahma said to his son: Thou hast
been concealed (gupta) by me like a picture (chitra) and shalt therefore be called Obitré
Guptá by the learned.'
+ Kayastha in Sanskrit means “one who resides in the body." A detailed account of the
logend is given in the Pátál Khand of the Padam Púrár.



438
Kákar-Kalál.
the mountains south of the Zhob Valley are held by the Musa Khel, a
Kákar clan, and the Isot, a clan of the Parni Afgháns who are akin
to the Kákars. Kákar hal 18 sons of his own and adopted 6 more,
and these founded 24 clans. It is difficult to regard the Kákars as
Scythic.
Kákar, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Kakaş, an Aráín clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KAKEZAí, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) fouud in Montgomery.
See also under Kalál.
KAKKEZA1,* a class of Muhammadan traders found all over India and as far
west as Kandahár. They claim to be by descent Afgháns of Seistán,
sprang from Kakka, a son of Karn, and the nucleus of the class may
well be a pure Pathán clan. But the sections of the Kakkezai include
such names as Bhursi, Malak, Kethale, Kasoliya Shaikh, Vansare and
Nakhasria, and, in Sialkot, Bale, Bhagirath, Chándi, Hánda,t Khoria,
Wadrath and Wanjotra, which hardly point to an Afghán origin and
lend colour to the theory that the Kakkezai were, like the Khoja, Hindus
converted at an early period of the Muhammadan invasions and affiliat-
ed to a Pathán clan. A family at Pasrúr in Sialkot is called Mír Daha,
and the office of that name at Bajwára in Hoshiarpur was held by a
Kakkezai family in 1120 Hijri. In the Jullundur Doáb a branch of the
Kakkezais, entitled Shaikhs, rose to eminence during Sikh times and
even gave governors to Kashmír. The community is an influential
and enterprising one in the Punjab.
Kákra, a military Brahman family, settled at Árá in Jhelum.
Kakķí, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
RAGUÁNA.—The term for Kumhárs in the Sandal Bár in Jhang. They are
found as cultivators in many rahnás or båmlets, and also have rahnás
of their own to which they have gathered to avoid the begár laid on
them in other villages. They are called Kakuána, and say they are
not Kumhárs, but Játs, descended from one Káku: and that they took
to pot-making a few generations ago.
KALÁL. (1) a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery
and Multán: (2) Kalál or Karál, a class of very varying status and
probably composite origin. The Karal claim Hindu Rajput ancestry
and derive their name from Karauli, the State in Rajputána. They are
divided into 52 clans or gots including the Tulsi and Pital (in Kapur-
thala). These Karáls are also styled Ahluwalia, from Ahlu, a village
in Lahore, and the Ahluwalia sections are said to be: Tulsi. Phúl
Mali, Rek bi, Sad and Segat. The Karáls are found in all the Districts
of the Northern Panjab from Gujrát to Hoshiarpur, and are said to
avoid widow remarriage.
The Kalál or NEB are also Hindus, but they more frequently em-
brace Sikhism than the Karals. They are by profession distillers, and
the word Kalál appears to be derived from kulál, a. potter.
* Mackenzie says the Kakkezai are also called Bulledee (Bileladlé), but he does not explain
the term. Gujrát Sett. Rep., 1861, p. 27. Bulledee may be a transliteration of Baledi, one
vho herds oxen': Punjabi Dicty., p. 86,
+ Hánda is a got of the Khatris.



Kalál-Kálir.
489
The Kalál gots are not apparently numerous and include :
Bhágar.
Hatyár.
Bhamrál.
Jajj.
Bhandárí.
Janwáthía.
Bharwáthía.
Ladháthía.
Bhukái.
Mammak.
Bimbat.
Paintal,
Pall.
These, it will be observed, differ from the Karál gots on the one
hand and the Kakkezai sections on the other.
KALANDAR, see Qalandar.
KALLIGAR see Thathera.
KALAR, (1) a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Multán; (2) a
Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Kálas, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KALABAN, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found iv Montgomery.
KALÁSARAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Kálása, a tribe of Káfirs, long subject to Chitral and found in two small
villages, Káláshgúm and Bidir of that State. They speak the Kalash
language and are Faqir Miskín by status. The Kám Kafirs affirm
that the whole of the country from the Eastern Káfiristán frontier as
far as Gilgit was once inhabited by the Kalach.
KALÁONT, KALÁWAŅT, fem. -ÁNÍ, -Ní, a class of professional musicians and
singers : see under Bhát.
KALEKÁ, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
KALER. (U) A Ját tribe found in Jínd, where the samádh of its Sidh, Didár
Singh, at Bhampawadi is revered on the 1st badi of Mágh. cf.
Bharánch. It is also found in Sialkot, where it claims Chaubán Rájput
origin. like the Chímas, and descent from Rájá Kang through Kahr
and his descendants Dára and Nattú who migrated to that District in
Jahányír's time. In Ludhiana the Kaler Játs at weddings worship their
jatheră at his matt or shrine. They also affect Sakii Sarwar and
aut' marriages an offering of bread is made to a Bharai. The first
milk of a cow or buffalo is given to a virgin and, if it is abundant, to
other girls as well. It is also found as an agricultural clan in Amritsar
and in Montgomery, in which latter District it is Muhammadan: (2) an
Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar
KALERA, a Muhammadan tribe, found in Montgomery (probably Kaler).
KáLEROTH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Kalgán, Kalghán, an Awán clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Kálhír (? Kálír) a tribe of Játs. It holds about 16 villages in pargana
Indri in Karnal but describes the number as 12 (a bárá). Dabkauli
Kalán is its parent village, and it is also the parent village of 12
Kálhír villages east of the Jumna, of 12 across the Ganges in Morádábád.
and of 17 villages in Ambála. The Kálhírs are divided into two clans
or beong, Mandhán and Turka which cannot intermarry. Mandhán was
son of Mánd, and Turka of Jejal, and Mánd and Jejal were brothers.
Originally they came from Ajodhya, first migrating to Pamaktoda in the
Dakhan or Målwa, and afterwards to Dardrehra in Jaipur.



440
The Kalhoras.
KALHORA or SARAI, originally a Ját tribe, also known as Dodái Laţi,* which
gave a dynasty to Sind and is still represented in Dera Gbázi Khán.
Its ancestors were darweshes or religious mendicants who followed the
tenets of the Sayyid Muhammad, the Júnpúri, a noted teacher, and
one of them, Harmus, espoused a daughter of the Abara Játs of Sind,
receiving a grant of land as her dower. His son or grandson, Shaikh
Nasír, and his son Shaikh Dín Muhammad established their temporal
and spiritual authority over the Abara territory in Upper Sind. His
brother Yár Muhammad threw off all allegiance to the Mughals, seized
the Síwistán sarkár of Thatha, the Siwi mahali of Bakhar in the
Multán Province, and Dihár, and wrested the title of Khudáyár from
the Mughal authorities.† His descendant Nur Muhammad drove the
Dáúdpotras out of tbe zamindári of Lakkhi, in the Bakhar mahall.f
In 1736-37 the Laţi Khán, Khudáyár, ſ received the province of Thatha,
together with the southern part of the Bakhar sarkár, but two or three
years later he was stripped of two-thirds of his territory by Nádir Sháh.
After Nádir Shah's death however the Khudáyár assumed authority
over all Sind, under the nominal suzeraignty of the Durranis, but their
rule was short-lived. Nur Muhammad Kalhora was succeeded on his
death in 1752 by his son Muhammad Murád, but he only ruled for five
years and was deposed by the Tálpur Baluch, who set up his brother
Míán Ghulam Shah (1757-58). An attempt by his brother Attár Khán
to regain Sind, under the authority of a Durrani grant, failed.|| Ghulam
Shah died in 1771, while superintending the erection of the fortress of
Haidarabad in Sindh, after a stormy reign of 15 years. He had in
1758 allowed the East India Company to establish a factory in Sindh,
but Sarfaraz Khán, his son and successor, cancelled the permit in 1775.
A year previously he had caused Bahrám Khán, head of the Talpurs,
and one of his sons to be assassinated, and this led his dethronement, in
or about 1786.
* Lati is said to be derived from the Hindui lag, 'tangled or clotted hair,' and kalhorah
in Sindhi is said to bear the same meaning. A derivation from lat, a 'club'in Sindhi, has
also been suggested, and in front of the kalhora chief's tomb at Khudb-ábád a number of
clubs are suspended.
of According to the Dera Gházi Kháp Gazetteer, p. 23, Yár Muhammad aided by the Khán
of 'Kalát defeated the governor of Sevi about 1700. After establishing himself in Northern
Sindh, he made his formal submission to Jahándár Shiáh on his succession to the throne of
Delhi and was invested with the title of Nawáb, and the governorship of Sevi.
I And socn came into contact with the Mirránis, ibid. p. 23. .
$ The title Khudáyár appears to have been heroditary, or to have been bestowed upon
the mansabdár or office-holder for the time being by the Mughals. But according to the
Dera Ghizi Khán Gasetteer (p. 24) Núr Muhammad submitted to Ahmad Shah Durrani on
Nádir Shah's assassination and received from him the title of Shah Nawaz Khán. A year
or two later however he rebelled and was driven into Jaisalmer.
| According to Shahámat Ali (Picturesque Skctches in India) Attár Khan was sent along
with a force by Ahmad Shah and on his arrival at Shikárpur Mián Ghulam Shah fied, but
be was supported by the Abbássi family, rulers of Bahawalpur, and he and another brother
Ahmadyár defeated Attár Khán. The latter obtained a second force from Ahmad Shah, and
the brothers then divided their territories, Ghulam Shih taking Thatha, and Attár Khudá-ábád
and Ahmadábád. Attár was however soon dispossessed again and settled at Ikhtiyar Khán
whence he made several more attempts to oust Ghulam Shah. The story given in the Dera
Gházi Khán Gazetteer that Mahmúd Shah Gujar helped Ghulám Shah to re-establish the
Kalhora power at Dera Gházi Khán is probably incorrect. The other version, that he was
opposed by Mahmúd Shah and also by the Gházi Khán is more probable. That Ahma,
Sháh despatched Kaura Mal, governor of Multán, against the Kalhora in 1758 is also likoly.
but his defeat by Kaura Mal. if it ever occurred, cannot have been severe, for in 1750
Ghuám Sháb finally broke the Mirráni power after taking Dora Gházi Rhán.



441
Káliar-Kalyár.
The name SARAI or Serai is borne by the notable Kalhora family of
Hajipur in the Jámpur tahsil of Dera Gházi Khán. For an account of
it reference must be made to the Dera Ghazi Khán Gazetteer, pp. 91–94,
but it should be noted that the statement therein made that the Daud-
potras are descended from Jám Junjar and therefore akin to the
Kalhoras is repudiated by the ABBássi or DáÚDPOTRA tribe, though it was
accepted by Raverty.
KÁLIAR, a sept of Rájputs, found at Panipat. Its family saint, Kálá Sayyid,
is a great worker of miracles, and anyone sleeping near his shrine
must lie on the ground or he will be bitten by a snake. But if a snake
bite a man on a Kaliár's ground he will suffer no harm.
KALIRÁWAN, a tribe of Jáțs, claiming descent from a Siroha Rajput by a
Nain Ját wife : found in Hissár.
KAL KHAND, a tribe of Játs, descended from Kala. It has for 25 genora.
tions been settled in tahsil Tind, but came originally from Rámpur
Khandal in Delhi.
KALL"), a tribe found in Jhelum : see under Bharat.
KALLŮ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar, in Montgomery (where it
is Muhammadan), and also in Shahpur.
KALMAT, -I.-A BALOCH tribe. Formerly of great importance, the Kalmats
fought with the Marris. Dames describes them as a Levitical tribe,
probably non-Baloch. They are now found at Pásni in Mekrán and in
Sindh. The name is probably derived from Khalmat in Mekrán, the
connection with the Karmati (the Karmatian heretics of Elliot's History
of India) being doubtful.
KALO, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Multán.
Kálon, a Ját tribe, found in Sialkot. It is desoribed as of Somabansi or
Lunar descent, from Rájá Jágdeo of Dháranagar, and has three movís or
clans, Nehut, Jodh and Banna. Doubtless KABLON.
KÁLRú, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán tahsil, where Kálrú employés
of Shah Jahán's army received grants of land.
Kals, an agricultural clan found in Shábpur, and in Montgomery (where it is
Muhammadan).
KALBAN, a Gujar tribe, claiming descent from Rána Har Rai, Chavhán, by a
Gujar wife. He assigned them a part of his conquests in the Jumna
Doáb and they still hold a little land in the Chauhan Nardak of Karnál.
KÁLSAN, & Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KALSIYA, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KALTEA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KALYA, (1) a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery : (2) a
Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar, and (3) an Awán clan
(agricultural) found in Amritsar..
KALTÁR, (1) a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur: (2) a Ját olan
(agricultural, found in Multán.



442
Káma-Kamboh.
Kámá.-(1) A man, generally of low-caste, who has brought himself and
even his descendants for several generations under obligation to serve a
land-holder on account of debt, the service being rendered in lieu of the
interest while the principal remained as a perpetual debt. This condi-
tion of service still exists in Chamba, though more or less secretly, as it is
contrary to the State law, and also in Kullu in spite of the law. It pro-
bably exists all through the hills. (2) The káma of the plaios is a field
labourer.
KAMALIA, KAMBALIA : see Gadaria. In Karnal Muhammadan Játs who have
taken to blanket weaying are also called Kamalias and are said to
marry only among themselves. But the Hindu Kamalias appear to be
all Gadarias in fact.
KAMÁCH, a small tribe of vagrant minstrels, apparently akin to the
Mírásis.
KAMÁLZAI, one of the four main divisions of the MANDANR branch of the
Khakhai (Khashi) Pathans. The Kamalzai and Amazai, another branch,
are found in Mardan and the Razzar in Pesháwar.
KAMANGAR, Kamagar, a bow-maker. With bim may be classed the tír-gar
or arrow-maker, and possibly the phareru, but the latter appears to be
merely the hill name for the rang-8áz.* The Kamagar, as he is com-
monly called, is chiefly found in towns and cantonments and, except in
Kángra, is always a Muhammadan. Now that bows are only made
for presentation the Kamagar has taken to wood decoration in general.
Any colour or lacquer that can be put on in a lathe is generally applied
by the Kbarádi, but flat or uneven surfaces are decorated either by the
Kamangar or by the rangsúz, the former doing the finer sorts of work.
The Kamángar does not form a distinct caste, but is professionally
inferior to the Tarkhán or rang sáz, though he belongs to the Tarkhán
caste.
KAMBALIA, See Gadaria.
KAMBOH.---(1) The Kamboh is one of the finest cultivating castes in the
Punjab. They seldom engage in market-gardening, but they are no
less industrious and skilful than the Aráiņs. They are found in the
apper Sutlej valley as low down as Montgomery, throughout the
northern portion of the eastern plaius, and as low dowŋ the Jamna
valley as Karpal. They are especially nomerous in Kapúrthala. The
Jumna Kambohe seem to have come into the valley from the west, and
there has lately been & very large influx of Kambohs from the northern
tracts of Patiala into the great dhák jungles between Thánesar and the
river. The Sutlej Kambohs of Montgomery are divided into two
branches, one of which came up the river from the Multán condtry
(whence they are called lammawalas, fr. lamma, west') and the other
down the valley from the neighbourhood of Kapurthala (whence they
are called tappa wála, from tappa, said to be the region between the
Beás and Sutlej), both movements having taken place under the Sikh
• The pharera or bharera is also said to be a silversmith : see under Lohár.



Kamboh origins.
448
role. Under that rule they also came into Jullundur from Kapúrthala.*
They claim descent from Rája Karan, and say that their ancestor fled
to Kashmir. The Kambohs of Bijnor also trace their origin to the
trans-Indus country, and Mr. Purser accepts this tradition as evidently
true. They are said by some to be ancient inhabitants of Persia, and
the Karnál Kambohs trace their origin from Garh Ghazni; but the
fact that 40 per cent. of them are Hindus and 23 per cent. Sikhs is
conclusive against their having had any extra-Indian origin, unless at
a very remote period. Aráíņs and Kambohs are commonly supposed to
be closely related : indeed in Montgomery a man appears to be called
Aráíņ if he is Musalman and Kamboh if Hindu.t But that this is not
always the case is evident from the fact of a very considerable propor-
tion of the Kambohs of Amritsar, Lahore, Ferozepur, Pațiála, Nabha,
and Maler Koțla having returned themselves as Musalmáns, although
Musalmán Aráiņs are also numerous in those tracts. In Jullundur the
village of Bhalowál is owned partly by Kambohs and partly by Aráíņs,
both being Musalmán. It is perhaps doubtful whether the supposed
relationship has any further basis than the fact that they both came
from the west, and are both of much the same social standing and
agricultural repute. It is highly probable that the nucleus of the
Aráíņ caste was a group of Hindu Kambohs converted to Islám. Thus
in Jullundur the Gaure, Hánde and Momi clans are found in both
castes, and in Montgomery several of their clan names are identical.
It is said by some that the chief distinction is that the Kambohs take
money for their daughters, while the Aráíņs do not. But the social
standing of the Kamboh is on the whole superior to that of the Aráiņ,
and very markedly so where the latter is a vegetable-grower. The
Kamboh, moreover, is not a mere agriculturist. He not infrequently
engages in trade, and even takes service in the army or in offices or
even as a private servant, while his wife not infrequently lends money
even where he is a mere husbandluan; and under Akbar a Kamboh
general called Shahbaz Khán commanded 5,000 men and distinguished
himself greatly in Bengal. I Musalman Kambobs held Sohna in Gur-
gáon some centuries ago; and the tombs and mosques that they have left
show tbat they must have enjoyed a considerable position. The mili-
tary, mercantile, and clerklv Kambohs are said to be distinguished as
Qalmi or “men of the pen," and not to intermarry with the agricultural
or Kháki section of the caste. But this is probably a mere social cus-
tom and not a caste ruls. The Kambohs do not seem to bear as high a
Read vers of the slaughtent the choral of the Mon
* The Kamboh villages in Jullundur are clustered iogether in Nakodar tashil in the
extreme south-west on the Kapurthala border. Tradition says that in 1654 A. D. the
Punjab was devastated by floods, so Jahangir sent Shur Shah, a Súba, to restore it and he
brought with him from Sunám in Patiala (Mr. Purser thought this possibly a mistake for
Sohna, a former Kamboh stronghold in Gurgaon) two men, Achbrá, whom he located near
Chunian in Lahore, and Rath whom he settled near Sultánpur in Kapúrthala where the
Kambobs founded a bára or group of 12 villages.
The Kambohs of Phillaur though few merit special notice. They claim to be Surajbansi
Rajputs who came from Kámróp (Assam) on the Brahmaputra to Delhi in Humáyún's
time. Thence Bohd Rai migrated to Lahore and Dála Rai to Jullundur. This may be a
poetical way of saying that Shahbaz Khán's career in Bengal raised his family to Rájput
status.
† In Multán, where the Kambohs are poor and unimportant, they often cultivate vegetables
and those so occupied are not uncommonly called Aráíns by the people.
He had 9,000 men under his command wheu operating on the Brahmaputra : Blochmann's
Ain-j-Akbari, I, 399.402.



444
Kamboh etymologies.
character for honesty as they do for skill. There is a Persian proverb
current in the United Provinces : “ The Afgháns, the Kambohs, and the
Kashmíris ; all three are rogues (badzát)," and in Karpal Mr. Benton
described them as "notoriously deceitful and treacherous.” On the other
band Sardár Gurdiál Singh states, it is not known on what authority
that“ during the reign of terror in India, it was the Kambohs who were
trusted by the rich bankers for carrying their cash in the disguise of
faqirs." The Kambohs are said to be exceptionally numerous in
Meerut. Their location under the hills lends some slight support to
their tradition of origin from Kashmir.
The Kambohs are not very numerous in the State oi Bahawalpur,
but they offer some points of interest. The Hindu Kambohs 150
rears ago, occupied Jhullan, a village on the right bank of the Sutlej
not far from Pák pattan.. Being oppressed they migrated and founded
Jhullan, a village in Kárdári Minchinábád. Jhullan was a Bodla faqir
to whom they paid special reverence and after whom they named their
villages, and his descendant Ibsád Ali is still greatly revered by the
Hindus. The Kambohs say they originally came from Amritsar and
that they and the Aráíņs have a common origin. The Aráíņs, who are
scattered all over the State, claim Rájput origin, and say their old head-
quarters was Uch, whence they migrated to the Rávi and the Ghaggar.
Some popular accounts of the origin of the name Kamboh follow :-
(1) Ouce a powerful Rájá of the Solar race, whose capital was at Ajudhia, marched
Thence to Derat and having killed Parmar, its Rájá, took possession of his kingdom. Ho
founded Warangar and his son founded another town, which he named Dejapur, and the
cities of Lambni and Gajni. The latter was his capital, and lay near the city of Kambay,
the peninsula south of Guzerat. At the Solono festival when he was performing religious
rites he was attacked by an enemy who had conspired with his parohit, his city was
plundered and its people massacred. Of those who escaped some fled to sámána along the
Ghaggar. passing by Jaipur and Sirhind on their way, thence spread over the country
between the Jumna and the Sutlej, and after wandering through the country watered by the
Sutlej and Beas scattered over the whole Punjab. Others reacbed Multán via Sind and
thence spread into Montgomery. They are called Kambohs because they came from Gajni,
near Kambay. Others assert that the name is a corruption of kambudh (men of little
intellect) because they did not take up arms on the Solono day, bat preferred to die.
(2) Rájá Sodakhsh of Kamboj of the Solar race and a descendant of the god Chander
Burman sided with the Kauravas in their fight with the Pandavas. He perished with nearly
all his men in the battlefield, and those who escaped settled in Nábha and came to be called
Kamboji whence Kambob.
(3) Kamboh is said to be compounded of Kai and anboh, and the tribe is said to be de.
scended from the Kai dynasty of Persja, to which the emperors Kaikáus, Kaikhusro, Kaikubad,
Kai.Lebrashab and Darius all balonged. When they migrated to the Punjab they came
to be called Kai-ambohs or Kambohas.
(4) Hazrat Abdulla, son of Zuber, was sent with a large army to conquer Persia, where
he settled and built many huts on the banks of the river. The Persians could not under.
stand their tongue (Arabic), so they became kam.go or taciturn. Zuber's army comprised
inen of many beliefs. In time their settlements were destroyed and the ‘Kamgos ' fed.
The first story is the one naturally favoured by the Kambohe themselves and the fact re.
mains that the Solono festival is not observed by them, because they regard it as inaus-
nicious. The author of the Aina Tarikhnáma and Gur Tirath Sangra has given an
account of the Kambohs and assigns their origin to the Kambojas, but against this it may be
urged that the Kambohs-
(i) do not observe the Salono or tie the rakhri on it:
cich at the phera their parohits proclaim Gaſh Gajni or Ghaggar Bás as their original
home:
(iii) that their gots correspond with those of the Brahmans and Chhatris :
(iv) that they perform the parojan oi bandhan ceremony:
Tul that they worship weapons at the Dasehra and wear them at weddings, and
(vi) that they cut the jand tree and sacrifice a ho-goat at a marriage



Kamboh groups.
445
The only point which merits notice in these folk-etymologies is the
allusion to Sodaksh (Sudakshina), king of Kámboja, a territory which
lay under the hills, which now form the northern border of the
Attock and Ráwalpindi Districts, from the Indus to the Jhelum. That
king, according to the Mahabharata, joined the Kauravas with an army
containing Yavanas and Shakas. But Kámboja also appears to have
been the name of a tribe. These facts are in accord with the tradition
that the Kambohs came from Kashmír, but beyond that there is abso-
lutely nothing but the resemblance in the names to enable us to identify
the Kambobs with the Kámbojas. How their gots can be said to
correspond with those of the Brahmans or Chhatris is not clear. The
Kambons have very few large sub-divisions. The vine largest are-
Dahút, Jaura, Sande, Jammún, Jbande, Thind, Jausan, Mabrok, Unmál.
The Kambohs are by religion Hindu, especially in the east, Sikb,
especially in the Sikh Districts, while some are Jain, and a great many
are Muhammadans. The latter are in Lahore described as hardly dis-
tinguishable from the Aráíņs, but the Sikh Kamboh is better than
either, being equal to the Aráíņ in industry, but more enterprising and
more provident. He matches the Aráíņ as a market gardener and is
not inferior to the Sidhu Ját in general farming though he is smaller
in physique and less intelligent than the Ját. The Sikh Kambobs in
the Chenáb Colony numbered over 10,000 in 1904.
The Hindu Kambohs wear no janeo and do not purify the chauká.
Their women wear the gown and formerly wore no nose-ring. Widow
remarriage is allowed.
The Karnbols of Montgomery, who are almost without exception
Hindus, affect the cult of Bhuman Sháh, an Udási fagir whose shrine
is at the village of that name in Dipálpur tahsíl. He is said to have
lived from 1687 to 1756 and was himself a Kamboh. He is looked
upon as a patron saint.
Hindu, Sikh and Jain Kambohs avoid 3 gots in marriage, the Muham-
madans only one. The Hindu Dhat Kambohs perform the first tonsure
under a dhák tree and the Jham got at a Báhá's shrine in Lahore.
The Kambohs reverence Sultán and Bhairon.
The Muhammadan Kambohs have two groups :-
(i). Bawan-gota, * i.e., 52 gots.
(ii). Chaurási-gota, i.e., 84 gots.
These groups do not intermarry or smoke with Hindu Kambohs,
though they are said to be of the same origin (as the Hindus?). It is
gaid that when Garh Gajni was destroyed a Chaurási Kamboh took
refuge with a bard named Kamáchị and so the ancestor of the Bawan-
gote severed all connection with him.
The Karnál account is that the Karnboh first settled in Lalachi, now
in Patiala, whence they founded 32 villages. The Lalachi Kambohs
claim to be Báwan-gotas. A section of these Kambohs embraced Islam
only under Jahángír, and hence the mass of the Bawan-gotas became
Muhammadans, while the bulk of the Chaurasi-gotas remained Hindus.
* The Bawan.gota gots will be found in the Appendix.



446
Kamerá„Kanauri.
The two most important centres of the Báwan-gotas are Sanaur and
Sunám in Pațiála. "The ' 52' are in their own estimation superior to
the '84.gotas.' The latter are found in the Banúr and Thuri (? Dhuri)
ilágas of Patiala, in Maler Koțla, Nábha, the Naraingarh tahsil of
Ambála and in Saharanpur east of the Jumoa; also in Amritsar,
Multán, Montgomery and Lahore. A note from Ambála makes the
*52-gotas' descendants of a cadet branch and the '84-gotas' of an
elder branch.
The Kambohs follow many occupations, as confectioners, retail
dealers, etc., as well as cultivators. As agents to bankers they are
much trusted. (2) an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Kamerá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KAMIL, a sept of Rajputs, found in Siálkot.
Kamín, fem. -AŅI.
Kamíra, a weaver, see under Juláhá.
KAMLÁNA, a sept of the Siá ls.
KAMOKE, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery
KÁMON, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KANYANA, an A ráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KANAG, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. (Doubtless Kang).
KANAURI, KANÁWARI,* ar inhabitant of Kanaur, the valley which, lying
on the Upper Sutlej, forms an appanage of the Bashahr State.
Its inhabitants are almost entirely Kanets or Jáds, but differ as com.
pletely from the Kanets of Bashahr proper as do the Láhula Kanets
from those of Kullu.
Besides the Kanets or Jáds the only two castes in Kanaur are the
Chámang,t who make shoes and weave, and the Domang, I who are
blacksmiths and carpenters.
Water or cooked food which has been touched by the lower castes is
not used by Kanets, nor are people of these "castes allowed to enter a
Kanet's house. If a Kauet eat such food inadvertently he applies to his
Rája who bids him make expiation (práyaschitta) and pay some
nazrána or forfeit. This custom is called sajeran or sacheran.
The Kanets of Ranaur are said to be divided into three grades, each
comprising a number of septs, whose names do not appear among the
Kanets of Bashahr proper.
The Kanet septs of Ranaur, according to their geographical distribution. .
18T GRADE KANETS.
Parganá Rajgaon.
Bairyáp.
Mælas.
Sakhan.
Skámtas.
Saná.
Rokérú.
Wáng mo.
Bbwal.
Dérán,
Thángar,
Dapráto.
Dalyán.
Dámes.
Bitaryan.
* Kadaura appears to be the more correct form.
+ The Chamárs of the plains, doubtless.
The Doms of the plains.



Kanet septs in Kanaur.
447
Parganá shúwá.
Borag, Tib. Pores,
Khádare.
Láspá.
Ranshyán.
Barji.
Shill.
Dhanshyán.
Shyáltú.
Gyólang.
Farakpá.
Tholpá.
Thármi.
Pálsar.
Loktas
Paso, Tib. Puang.
Aldada.
Pángtú.
Makalá.
Chungpo.
Shuryán.
Mispon or Mishpon,
Parganá Inner Tukvá,
Bíst.
Ráthú.
Dhangch.
Kállam,
Nyokché.
Parganá Outer Tukpá.
Répáltá.
Chánghang.
Dúdyán.
Ohethá,
Fanyán.
Parganá Pandarabís.
Yulán.
I. Choglá
Parganá Thárábís.
Tyurая.
Jogt6.
l Zintu.
2ND GRADE KANETS.
Parganá Inner Tukpá.
Brálbang.
Mojrang.
Shyáll.
Cbámápo.
Pápkar.
Sotha.
Kápbú.
Rákshas.
Ungyá.
Pargana Shúwá.
Kbargán.
Turkyán
Khinp, Tib. Khrimpa.
Shyúná.
Parganá Rajgáon.
Anobhán, Tib. Angchan. 1 Mashán.
3RD GRADE KANBTS WHO WORK AS POTT ERS.
Wángothing.
I Wázá.
1 Méwar.
Titles of officials.
1. Cháros, the hereditary headman of a village (in each village).
2. Grokoh, the bereditary kárdár of the village deity, who speaks on his behalf.
3. Máthas, the hereditary kárdár of a deity. His daty is to petition the deity on
behalf of the pablio.
4. Pujyáres, whose hereditary daty it is to worship the deity: Nos. 2, 8, and 4 are
found in every village where there is a deity.
5. Bathungrú, an official like the dafádár of the State.
· In the Kanaur valley Buddhism is the dominant faith, but though
the social customs of the people generally resemble those of the Hindus,
the observances bear Tibetan names, and the ritual is conducted in that
language.
Birth customs.
During pregnancy the following chant is sung :- O goddess Tárá, I
bow down to thee, be pleased to bestow on this woman thy choicest
blessings. And a charia written on a bit of paper or birch-tree bark
is tied round the woman's neck.
On the birth of a son the goddess Dolms is adored, and the chant
called Bhum chung, which runs : Om tayathá gáte gáte párá gáte
swáhas ( May God bless the child') is sang. The old women of the



448
Kanaur customs,
family perform the midwife's functions ; and for a fortnight the mother
lives a part, being debarred from touching anything. At the end of
that period she and all she possesses are sprinkled with cow's urine mixed
with Ganges water, as among Hindus. The child's horoscope is cast
by a lárna, who also names the child when it is 15 days old, or on any
other auspicious day. It is generally brought out of the house for the
first time at the full moon and, if possible, at an acspicious moment,
when one or two months old. Charms for its long life are also made
by the lámas.
A boy's head is shaved when one year old, the limas performing a
hom, * pujá, or páth sacrifice. As the Kanauris only rank as Shadras,
they are not entitled to wear the sacred thread, so they wear instead a
kanthit or necklace from the age of 8.
Marriage customs.
The marriage customs in Kangur resemble those of the Tibetans.
Brothers marry a joint wife, the lámas solemnizing the wedding by chant-
ing certain hymns and worshipping the gods or goddesses, goats also
being sacrificed.
The nuptial rites in Kanaur are peculiar. In the first place the
amount of the dheri is unusually high, varying from Rs. 100 to
Rs. 1,000.1 The custom as to dower is also different. Many people
give the bride as many pewter vessels as there are in the bridegroom's
family, but ornaments, he-goats, cows, etc., are also given. The wed-
ding is thus solemnized :-
One of the brothers, most usually the one who is the bride's equal in
age, goes with some of his relatives to her father's house on the day
fixed by the láma (priest). There the party are well entertained, and
the láma solemnizes the wedding by reciting some chants in Tibetan
after the Tibetan manner. Next day they return to their own house
with the bride richly dressed and adorned. On reaching home the
bride is made welcome, especially by her mother-in-law. After a
religious ceremony, the bride's right hand is held by all the bridegroom's
brothers, and then all of them are deemed to have married her. A feast
is then given to all who are present, and the lamas and musicians are
fee'd. This marriage is a valid one. The child of an unmarried girl
is called puglang (bastard), and has no right to anything by way of in-
beritance. Such children live by service and marry with some one of
their own class, i.e., with a puglang or puglakch. :
In case all the brothers have only one joint wife, there can be
no question as to the right of inheritance. And just as the bride's
om Hom is a rite in which flames are fod with clarified butter mixed with barley and
segamum seed; if possible almonds and dried grapes are also mixed in it. Púja is an
offering to the deity of a lamp fed with butter, water, flowers, sweetmeats, fruit, etc..
while páth consists in reading or reciting the Tibetan scripture called Chbas or Chhoss.
+ The kanthi is an ordinary necklace made of tulsi, the holy basil (Ocymum sacrum).
These kanthis are generally made in Hardwar, Bindraban, Ajudhya and Benares.
+ The dheri prevents a woman's going to another man, as only he who takes on him.
self the responsibility for it is entitled to keep the woman. It is a sum paid to the bride's
guardian by those of the bridegroom, and must be refunded to the latter if the marriage
turns out badly, e.g., if the wife leave her husband and go off with another man, he has to
refund tbe amount to them.
& The wife is often older than her husbands, or than some of them, and her age, especial.
ly if coupled with a sharp tongue, gives her a decisive voice in the family councils.



Kanaur death-rites.
449
mother-in-law is mistress of the family, so on her death the wife
succeeds as its mistress. Thus the movable and immovable property
of & fainily remains in its joint possess on and is never divided. But
the custom of polyandry is now.dying out by degrees.
Death customs.
As the trade and wealth of Kanaur increase and its people come more
in contact with India, they are rapidly abandoning the old customs, such
as dúbant (drowning), phukant (burning), bhakhant (eating), etc. This
last method of disposing of a dead body was formerly observed only by
the inhabitants of Hángrang ghori who are called by the Kanaur is
Nyám, and by the Kochỉ or Paháți people, Záş or Jár, Zád or Jáð.
The lámas used to consult their scriptures and advise as to the
disposal of the dead according to the time, etc., of the death, but now
the Hindu shrádhs, and so on, are observed. The only old custom which
survives is the annual shradh called phulaich,* in which a he-goat,
reared in the dead man's name, is dressed in his clothes, sacrificed and
eaten by the members of his kindred.
At a death bed, grain is distributed among all those present, and the
lámas read from Buddhist writings. The body is burnt on the same
day, or at latest on the next. Drums, sanáis, karnálst and couches
are played when the corpse is carried to the burning-ground. Some of
the bones are picked up, and sent either to Mánasarowar in Tibet, to
Rawálsar in Mandi State, or to the Ganges. In the deceased's room
a lamp is kept burning for seven days from the death, and incense is
also burnt in it. The chholpa (Hind. kiria karm) is performed from the
eighth to the tenth day; all the deceased's clothes are given to the
lámas, with other gifts. The panchaka or group of five constellations
is inain picious for the family of one who dies under it, and to avert the
evil, images of roasted flour are made and burnt with the corpse, to the
accompaniment of Tibetan chants.
After 15 days the láma does a hom pújá, and páth, reciting Tibetan
chants of purification. This ends the period of mourning. After a year
the phulaich || is observed, by giving food and clothes to a láma in the
deceased's name; and until this is observed the family must not wear any
new clotbes, etc. The shradh, called dujang in Kanauri, is also solemnised
by the láma. The burning-grounds are baunted by Mashán, Rákshas,
Shyúná aud Khar-shgúná, of whom the first two are conceived of as
evil spirits or demons, and the two latter as Jack-o'-lanterns or ghosts. I
* Fulaiob or Pholaich, from Hindi phúl, flower, is so called because Kanauris dunot
wear new clothes till one year after a death in the family, but after performing the dujang
they may wear flowers and new clothes.
† The sanái and kurnál are both musical instruments used in the hills. The former is
made of wood and is about a foot long with seven holes on wbich the fingers are placed
while playing and its sound is like that of an algojá; the latter is made of brass and is
like a long born with a round, broad inuth; in sound it resembles the conch.
I Taking the bones to the Ganges is said to be quite a recent innovation-only dating
back two or three years
S'The five nakshutras are Dhadistha, Shatbhishá, Párvábbádrapadá, Uttarábhádrapadá,
and Rewati.
Il Phuláicb is also the name of a fair held in October every year at Braling, near
Ropá. See Okbyáng in the list of fairs.
Mashán and Rákshasa aro of course Sanskrit terms. The other two are Kanáwari,
possibly corruptions of Tibetan words. It is worth remarking that Mashán Shyúná and
Rákshas are also septs of Kapets, found in Mollam, Asrang and Rírang villages respectively.



450
Religious days in Kanaur.
The following chant is repeated by the láma more than a thousand
times to exorcise an evil spirit from a man or woman: Om bájrá kílá
kiláyá dimo shakchá uchá thayálá faț. Any one bitten by a mad dog
is healed by repeating the following chant more than a thousand
times: Om khu •khe xáchả khá-thám deuá chang-ghế doishok.
T:
A chronological list of the Buddhist religious observances in Kanaur.
1. The Kángso, a religious ceremony, in which the hom, pújá and
páth are performed by the lámás and zomos, observed in every temple
throughout Kabaur on the 8th, 10th, 12th und 14th of the brigbt half,
as well as on the full moon and amáwas of each month.
2. The Zinshok, celebrated in Kanam village on the 8th of the
bright half, as well as on the full moon of each month, including the
amáwas.
3. The Torgyá, performed at Kánam, once on the 14th of the
hright half and again on the full moon of Phágun.
. 4. The Toná, also celebrated at Kánam on the 11th of Chait for
one day.
5. The Tíbángmá, performed at Kánam on the 20th of Paush.
6. The Kutimf, also celebrated at Kánam on the 15th of Phágun.
7. The Námgang, also observed at Kánam for two days from the
amávar of every month. Hám, pújá and páth are performed by the
lámás and zomos.
8. The Shibrát (Sanskr. Shivaratri, the birthday of Shibor
Mahadeo), is a religious ceremony not only of the Hindús but also
of the Buddhists. It takes place on the 14th of the dark half of
Phagun, on which day. the people adore Shib, whom they call Lofan,
and distribute food among relatives and friends.
9. The Shonetang, (Sanskr. Shrávanárchana, meaning 'worship
of Sáwan'), is celebrated at Grámang or Kathgaon in Bhábá parganá
on the full moon of Sáwan. About a dozen young men, taking with
them cooked food for three days, go out to gather wild flowers and
plants from the loftiest snow peaks. They pass two nights there,
collecting various kinds of wild flowers and plants, and on their
return they are received with joyous music by the villagers. The
Carland which they bring from the forest is offered to the deity, and
they then, together with women, dance and sing songs,
10. The Lámá-pazá, a Buddhist religious rite, is observed at
Lábrang, Shúwá parganá, on the amáwas of Chait. The lámás and zomos
devote themselves to the worship of the deity Chhakoling Dambar, while
dancing and singing are performed by men and women with great
rejoicings.
11. The Jágro (Sanskr. Jágaraņa, a vigil), is also a religious
ceremony, observed throughout Kanaur on the 20th of Bhadon. The
night is spent in singing and dancing to music, and worship of the
deity is performed in all the temples,



Fairs in Kanaur.
451
A list of the fairs held in Kanaur, with a brief description of each..
1. Losar, or New Year's Day, is observed at Kánam for three
days, from Paush shudi 13th till the full moon of Paush. All the
people assemble to ask the lámás about their gains and lessos during
the coming year. It is the most characteristic fair of Kanaur. Feasts
are given to friends and relatives, but dancing by men and women
to music is the chief functiun.
2. The Kángyur-zálmo (fr, kángyur, library, and zálmo, a visit),
takes place on the 15th gate of Hár (Asháph) at Kánam. People visit
the Tibetan Library, called Kángyur-tángyur, in the large village
of Kánam.
3. The Menthako fair also takes place at Kánam on the 20th
gaté of Bhadon (August) and lasts two days. The chief event at this
fair is a pony-race, feasting, drinking, dancing to music and singing.
4. The Khwákchá fair takes place at Kánain and lasts for 5 days
from the 20th gate of Mágh, ending ou the 25th. The nights are passed
in dancing and singing to music before the temple of the deity called
Dábla.
5. The Gángá fair takes place in Chángmang forest above Lippá,
in Sbúwá pargana, on the full moon of Kátik. Men, women and
children climb to the Chángmang forest, and eating, drinkiog,
dancing and singing are features of the festival.
.6. The Jokhya-kushimig and Jokhyá-chhugshimig at Kánam are
important festivals, at which visits are paid to relatives and friends,
on the 13th and 14th gate of Mágh (January).
7. The Ukhyáng (fr. ú, a flower, and khyáng, a sight of) is the most
remarkable fair in Kanaur. The people go to the high ranges to
gather wild flowers and leaves, and offer a large garland of them to
the deity. Men and women iu rich attire also dance and sing a song
which is roughly translated thus :-
" The fair called Ukhyáng is held first at Rupí village* in honour of the village deity
named Téras, t on the 10th of Bhado.
In Bárang villaget it takes place on the 20th gate of Bhado, when the upper forests
are full of wild flowers and plauts.
For whose sake is this monkish garlands O Néges/) of Bárang, 'tis for your good sake.
The Ukhyáng fair takes place when the forest is dry, in the dry forest there are no
flowers.
What is to be done then ? Again we say what is to be done ?
Bebold a garland of ráchú kánang ;ſ to whom are we to offer it ?
It must be offered to Márkáling.**
Again to whom should we offer a garland of shishyurtt?
We must offer it to the deity of Yaná or Mellam, by name Gandrápás.tt
Where is the remainder of the fair hold ?
.
* Bupí is a village in Pandarabís parganá.
+ Teras, the deity of Rupi village.
Bárang, a village in Inner Tukpá marganá,
$ Losbgar, the monkhood flower.
|| Náges, the deity of Bárang village.
Ő Ráchá-kánang, a plant which has leaves like a calf's ears whence its namo.
** Márkáling, deity of Khwangi, a village in Shúwá parganá.
tt Shishyur, a plant found on the snowy peaks.
fi Gandrápás, the deity of Yáná or Mellam, a village in Rajgáon parganá,



452
Fairs in Kanaur.
The fair of Maheshras*, the Bhábé parganát deity, takes place when the autumn
moon is full.
A handsome Rájá is Rájá Shumsher Singh. :
And Maheshras, the deity of Bhábá.
Like shúwá Chandiká, $ is beautiful.
In Tukpá parganá there are nine water channels,
But shúwá parganá has only one."
8. The Shogch fair is held at Chíní and lasts for 5 days, from Mangar
shudi 10th to the full moon of that month. People from all the
surrounding villages assemble to dance and sing and a great deal of
merriment results.
9. The Ráthin fair is also held in Chiní on the 1st of Paush and is
celebrated by dancing and singing.
10. The Agtarang fair at Richpá or Rispá in Ioner Tukpá lasts
for one day. All the people of the surrounding villages assemble, and
daucing and singing before the temple of Kulyo deity are the features
of the fair.
11. The Máng fair is also observed at Richpa and lasts for about
a week from the 18th of Mágh. The lámás and zomos devote them-
selves to the worship of Buddha, meu oud women dance and sing
to music with great merriment till the end of the fair.
12. The Yungnas or Jungnas fair is also held at Richpa in Paush,
the exact day being fixed by the zamíndárs to suit their own con-
venience, and it lasts for five days. Worship of Buddha is observed
with general rejoicings. Eating, drioking, dancing and singing are
the principal features of the fair.
13. The Sherkan fair is held in Kanam on the 3rd of Katik and
lasts but one day.
14. The Dumgyur-zálmo fair takes place at Kwalda, in Shúwá par.
ganá op an auspicious day appointed by the zamindárs in Háp (Ashåph).
Dumgyur neaos a Buddhist praying wheel, and zalmo, a visit. The
people visit the huge praying wheel, and turn it round to the right as
often as they are into praying wheel wheel, and zalma var(Ashách).
15. The Kailás-zálmo, or the visit to the Kailas mountain,' is
celebrated at Pílo or Spílo, io Sháwá parganá, on any auspicious day in
Hád fixed at the will of the zamindárs, and lasts ove day. Worship of
the Kailas mountain is performed with great rojoicings, dancing
and singing being the main features of the fair.
16. The Khepá fair is observed throughout Kanaur, for three days,
from Mangar badi saptami to Mangar badi dasmi. The people bring
thorns and put them on the doors of their houses in order that no evil
spirit ipay entor and on the 3rd day they take all the thorns outside
the village and burn them, as if they were buroing au evil spirit.
Dancing and singing with music are main features of the fair.
17. The Rás-kayang (rás Sanskr. ráshi, & zodiacal sign and
kayang, Sanskr. káya, body), is the day on which the sun roaches
* Mabeshras (2nd), the deity of Bhábá parganá,
| Bhábá is a pargana in the Wáng valley.
Shúwang Chandiká, the goddess of Kothi or Kostampi, a village in Shúwá parganá.



453
of the The Lehrang Pedople fait elke te plote of being an em, the 17th
Monasticism in Kanaur.
the zodiacal sign of Aries. In India known as the Meshſ-saņkránti
or Visbuva saņkrápti, throughout the Simla Hills it is called Bishú.
This fair is celebrated throughout Kanaur and the Simla Hills on the
1st of Baisákb. The houses are well whitewashed and decorated,
and dancing and singiug with great rejoicings are its main features.
18. The Lábrang-zálmo fair takes place at Kánam on the 17th
of Jéth. At this fair people visit the temple of Dáblá, and dance and
sing there with great rejoicings.
19. The Chhokten-zálmo fair is held at Lábrang, in Shúwá
pargana, on the 15th of Hár. People visit the temple called Chhokten
at Lábrang. Singing and dancing to music are its main features.
20. The Suskar fair is observed in Kothi or Kostampi as well
as elsewhere, about a week from the 9th of Pbágun. Two parties, one
of young men and the other of young women, fight with snow-balls
until they are tired. Singing and dancing to music before the goddess
Shúwáng Chandika are the main features of the fair.
21. The Jagang fair also takes place in Kothí on the 3rd of Mágh,
and lasts for a day. Dancing and singing songs to music, and worship
of the deity are performed with great rejoicings. - Jagang, from
Sanskr., yajna, means sacrifice..
22. The Bishu fair is the same as the Rás-káyang, which takes
place on the 1st of Baisakh. In Upper Kanaur the people call it
Rás-káyang, and in Lower Kanaur, Bishú.
23. The Bang-káyang fair is held at Grámang or Kathgaon,
in Bhábá parganá, on the full moon of Paush. All the Bhábá people
assemble iu the temple of Maheshras and worship hiin. Dancing and
singing are the main features of the fair.
Monasticism.
Kanet girls, who do not marry, but devote their time to the study
of the Tibetan scriptures are called zomo8 or jamos. They live in
punneries. The two principal nunneries are at Kánam and Sunnam,
and in these a great number of zomos live. Besides this, every
village has a few zom08.
Kanet boys, who learn the Tibetan scriptures, and are well versed
in the Buddhist doctrives, are called lámos. They live in monasteries
and are looked upon 'as very holy. In fact they are the priests of
all of the Kanets. There are several monasteries of these lámás in
Kánam, Sunpam, and other villages. Lámás are either Gyolang or
celibate, like the Brahmachárí, or Dugpú, who marry but never
shave the head.
The lámá is consulted with regard to every important undertaking.
Thus he is asked to name an auspicions day for beginning to plough
or sow, and at the time ascertained he recites chants like the one
begioning: Omn akúní nikání ambitá mandiité mantálé sváhá,' May
the gods bestow on us abundance of grain.' When a new roof is pnt
on a temple, wbich is called shánt,* the lámás perform & ceremony,
* From Sanskr. shánti, peace,



454
Kanazai-Kanchan,
reciting charms and performing hom, with the sacrifice of sheep
and goats. This is called parestáng (Sanskr. pratisthá, consecration).
When a new house is ready the lámá fixes the time auspicious for its
occupation, and the owner, dressed in new clothes, is then taken
into it with his wife, who rings a bell. This is called gorásang.*
New grain is first offered to the village-god and may then be eaten.
Cults in Kanaur.
An alphabetical list of the deotás in Kanaur; together with the name of the village in which
each is located.
con ti won como
12.
1. Badrinath, at Kámrú or Mone village.
2. Bhímákáli, at Kámrú or Mode village. (Also at Sarában.)
3. Ohhákoling Dámbar, at Lábrang village in parganá Shúwá.
Chandiká, at Ropá village in Shúwá parganá, Gangyul ghoſt. Also at Yáwring
village, Shúwá parganá.
Chhwedung, at Chángo village in Shúwá parganá.
6. Dáblá, at Kánam, Dábling, Dubling, Lío, spúwá or Poo, Shyásho, in Upper Kanaur.
7. Deodum, at Náko, in Shúwá parganá.
Gyángmágyum, at Jangi, in Shúwá parganá
Kásurájas, at Rirang or Ribbá, in Inner Tukpá parganá.
Khormo, at Pílo or spílo, in Shúwá parganá.
Kulyo, at Richpá or Rispá, in Inner Tukpá parganá.
Maheshras, at Sbungrá or Grosnam in Thárábís parganá, at Grámang or Kathgéon
in Bhábá pargană, and at Chúgáon or Tholang in Rajgáon parganá.
13. Márkáling, at Khwangi in Shúwá parganá.
14. Mathi, at Chhitkul, in Outer Tukpá parganá.
15. Milákyum, at Akpå village in Shúwá parganá.
16. Náges, at Bárang, Brúáng, t Chásang, Chhotá Kámbá, Kilbá, Mewar, Miró, Sánglá,
Sápní or Rápang villages.
17. Nágin, at Kari village in Thárabís parganá.
18. Narayan, at Barsering village in Outer Tukpá parganá.
19. Narenas, at Asrang, Chini, Shoháng, Urni, and Yülá villa ges ; and also at
Chugáon, Grámang and Shungrá, with the three Maheshras.
20. Ormig, at Morang or Ginam village in Inner Tukpá parganá.
21. Páthoro, at Rárang and Punnam villages, Shúwá and Rajgéon parganoo.
22, Rogshú, at Rogí village in Shúwá parganá.
23. Shankras, at Pwárí or Por village in Inner Tukrá parganá,
24. Shanshras, at Rákchham village in Outer Tukpá parganá.
25. Shéshéring, at Pángi village in Shúwá pargana.
26. Rápukch, at Thángí village in Inner Tukpá parganá.
27. Shúwáng Chandiká, at Kostampi or Kothi village in Shúwá parganá.
28. Tárásang, at Trándá village in Thárábis parganá.
29. Téras at Rúpi village in Pandrábís parganá.
30. Tungmá Dámbar, at Gyábung village in Shúwá parganá.
31. Ukhá, at Nachár and Bará Kámbá villages, Thárábís and Pandrábís parganus.
32. Yulshá, at Sunnam village in shúwá parganá.
KANAZAI, a naddáf or cotton-carder in Pesháwar.
KANAZAJ, one of the three main sections of the Utmánzai Pathans in Hazára.
KANCHAN, fem. -1, this like the KANJAR is hardly a caste, Kanchan simply
meaning a pimpi or prostitute, and being the Hindustani equivalent for
* From Sanskr. grihapravtishtha, entering in a house: it is called gharásni in the Simla
Hills.
† Náges deotá in Sánglá is thus addressed by the pujyáres in worship :-
O thou, who livest within the wall, who livest in holes, who canst go into a vessel, who
canst swiftly run, who livest in the water, on the procipice, upon the trees, in the waste.
land, among the meadows, who hast power like the thunderbolt, who livest within the
bollow trees, among the rocks, within the caves, be victorious.
# In this sense it has a plethora of synonyms.



Kánchi--Kandarke.
455
the Panjabi Kanjar. The word kanchan is said to mean 'gold' or
pure and illustrious.' The Hindu prostitute is commonly known as
Rámjani, Harkain being also used.* Randi is also used for a prostitute
in the east of the Province, but it only means a' widow' throughout the
Punjab proper. Only two-fifths of the Kanchans are males. They form
a distinct class, though not only their offspring, but also girls bought
in infancy or joining the community in later life and devoting them-
selves to prostitution, are known as Kanchaos. In the south-east of the
Punjab, however, the Kanchans appear to form a fairly distinct caste.
Those of them who have followed their profession for generations are
styled deradárs and look down upon the later recruits. They have a more
or less definite custom of inheritance, t and the birth of a girl is the
occasion for greater rejoicings than that of a boy, as a girl is a source of
wealth. The unmarried girls are generally prostituted, but wives and
sons' wives are kept in even more rigid seclusion than high caste women.
Wives have to be purchased from poor people of any tribe at consider.
able cost, as Kanchans do not give their daughters in marriage and can.
not obtain brides in their own caste. WŁen a girl attains puberty and
co-habits with a man for the first time a feast, called shadi miosi, is
given to all the brotherhood, and menials get their doles. Prior to this
ceremony the girl may wear a nose-ring, but not after it. Seven months
after a pregnancy too the brotherhood is feasted and menials paid their
dues. The mirási of the Kanchans is called dádá and gets & rupee a
year. A woman of another caste is admitted into the sisterhood by
drinking a cup of sweetened water and she is then entitled to be treated,
even in matters of inheritance, like a natural daughter. The Kanchan,
Rámjani and Harkain are said to rank above the Barikká, I Malzáda,
MUSALLI and Nat--all of whom appear to be or rank as prostitute castes.
The Kanchans of Ludhiána found in Nábha say they were Chughattái
Mughals descended from one Mirza Jeb. His grandfather Mirza Alam
was put to death for some t'eason at Delhi and Add to Rámpur. He is
said to be still spoken of as 'Rámpur Juni' and in order to conceal his
identity he joined the Kanchans. See also PERNA.
Káạchí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KAŅDá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KANDÁN, an agricultural clan found in. Shahpur.
KANDARKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
* The story told is that Ahad's son, the king Shidád, built a magnificent palace, which he
named Paradise. In it he placed virgins instead of the houris of Paradise, who are lawful
to the dwellers therein. This recalls the practice of the Assassins as told in the History
of that sect by von Hammer, p. 137 of the English translation :
“A youth who was deemed worthy, by his strength and resolation, to be initiated into
the Assassin service, was invited to the table and conversation of the grandmaster or
grand-prior: he was then intoxicated with benbane (hashish) and carried into the garden,
which, on awakening, he believed to be the Paradise : everything around him the houris in
particular, contributed to confirm his delusion.”
The Rámjani of course claims descent from Rám Ohandra.
† Kanchans and Kanjars generally follow Muhammadan Law in cases of inheritance,
Punjab Record, 95 of 1884, 52 of 1893, 62 of 1892 and 98 of 1885. In Nábha, however,
it is stated that sons and daughters succeed equally, contrary to Muhammadan Lap.
I A low class of Muhammadans: Punjabi Dicty., p, 100,



480
The Kullu Kanets.
Mandi and Snkrt. 4. Mangal, a sept which gives its name to the
Mángal, a tract iying west of the Pábar basin. 5. Kásib, another
götra name, more thau half of whom are returned from Bashabr, where
the Kanets are divided into numerous septs.
The Banets of Kullu,
Ranets of both sexes wear a drass which is picturesque, and not at all
oriental. A red and black woollen cap, not unlike a Scotch bonnet at
first sight, a grey or brown Inose woollen tunic girt in, with a rope or
sash at the waist, a striped or chequered blanket worn like a Scotch
plaid round the chest and over the shoulders, form the dress of the men.
If well enough off; they add loose woollen trousers tight round the ankle.
Some of the women wear a cap like that of the men, under which their
hair hangs down in long plaits lengthened out with plaits of worsted,
but most of them do without a cap, and wear their hair puffed out and
twisted into a high sloping chignon, not unlike the fashion once prevail-
ing among English women. Instead of a tunic they wear a plaid or
blanket fastened around them with bodkins, and so skilfully put
on that while the neck and arms are bare, all the rest of the body is
inodestly covered to below the knee : the leg is bare or covered with a
wcollen gaiter : broad metal anklets are not uncommon, and set off the
leg very prettily; the arms are generally overloaded with bracelets.
Both sexes are geperally shod with sandals made of plaited straw or
hemp, but many go bare foot, and a few wear leather shoes. Both sexes,
especially on festival days, are fond of wearing bunches of flowers stuck
in their caps or in their hair, and strings of flowers hung round their
necks. Some are hardly darker than Spaniards in complexion, with a
ruddy color showing in their cheeks ; others are as dark as the ordinary
Punjabi.* They are not tall, but look strong and active, and generally
have handsome figures. Many of the wonien have fine eyes, and a inild
and gentle expression of face, but the men, on the whole have the
advantage in regularity of feature. The finest men are to be found in
Saraj. The women do most of the field work, with the exception of
ploughing, but in return they have more liberty than in most parts of
India. They attend all the fairs and festivals (júch) held periodically at
every temple in the country. At these fairs both sexes join in the
singing and dancing, but the women in Kullu dance separately, and at
night only. In Bashahr the Kanets of both sexes dance together. In
the Lág and Parol waziris it is not uncommon to see many of both sexes
returning from the fairs decidedly tipsy, the result of deep potations
of súr or lugri, a kind of weak acid beér, generally brewed at home, from
rice. In Rúpi and Saraj drinking is considered a reproach, and almost
universally eschewed.+ In the winter, when confined to their houses by
With the exception of a few families, descendants of the Rájás' priests or parohits, the
Kullu Brahmans differ very little in appearance, dress or customs froin the Kanets. The
same may be said of nearly all of tbe few Rájputs. The blood is in fact generally very
mixed, for both Brabmans and Rájputs commonly marry Kanet girls: such wives are
known as srit in distinetion from tho lári, or wife of the same on ste taken by the regular
biáh ceremony: Lyall's Kángļa Sett. Rep., 114. The text is from $ 112.
+ In Rúpi a mildly intoxicating, but very refreshing, infusion of kemp-leaves (bhang),
violets and sugar is occasionally indulged in at fairs. In the other wazíris of Kullu Proper,
towards the sources of the Beas, there is much drunkenness. The hill-beer is of two kinds,
lugri and chakti and sur. The former is made from rice, fermented with phap, a kind of
yeast which is imported from Ladákh or Báltistán, and the composition of which is a trade



The Kullu Kanets.
461
the snow, the men spend most of their time in weaving blankets and
cloth for sale or home consumption : the women do not weave in
Kulla.
Social usages.
The s cial usages of the Kanets are not peculiar to the caste, but are
those which are followed by the other castes in the localities con-
cerned, the upper classes of the Kanets observing the same usages as
the Brahmans or Rájputs, while the lower are content to follow much
the same customs as the artisan castes below them. A full account
therefore of all the Kanet social usages and religious beliefs would be
tantamuunt to a description of all the Hindu usages in vogue in the
hills of Kullu, Mandi, Suket and Simla, together with an account of all
The Hindu beliefs in those hills. Such an account is attempted in the
Introductory Volume; and the notes which follow give only the barest
outlines of the social observances in Kullu. Those of the Kanets of
Láhul, Kanaur and Bashahr and separately described under LABULA
and KANAURI, and below on p. 000 will be found an account of the
People of Bashahr.
On the birth of a male child in Kullu there is a feast, and a present
is made to the headman (negij of the Kothi. The child is christened
some time within the year following, and is then produced in public,
and there is another feast. It is a common custom in Outer Saraj to
give two brothers names that rhyme. According to one informant,
who ranks all Kanets as Sudras, the Khash observe the same rites at
birth as the twice-born castes, while the Raos, like the low castes, simply
offer a bunch of green grass to the child's father and he places it on
his head, but gives no alms.
Three kinds of marriage ceremonies are in use in Kullu, viz. (1) Bedi
biah, the ordinary Hindu form; (2) ruti manúi, four or five men go from
the bridegroom to the bride's house, dress her up, put a cap on her head,
and then bring her home to the bridegroom ; (3) Ganesh puja, the form
used by Brahmans, Khatrís, Suniásás, etc., in marrying a Kanet girl. The
bridegroom sends his priest and others to the bride's house where worship
of Ganesh is performed, and the bride then brought home. Suniáras
send a knife to represent them. The children of a Brahman and Rájput
by a Kanet wife are called Brahmans and Rájputs; the term Ráthi is
often added as a qualification by any one pretending himself to unmixed
blood. In the absence of other children they are their father's full heirs,
but in the presence of other children by a lári wife they would ordinarily
only get an allotment by way of maintenance, put by some at one-fifth,
but the limit seems rathor vague in practice. The rule of inheritance in
and how castes, cites at
secret of the brewers, who are nearly a!! Ladákhis or Láhulis, and thus able to keep
the roadside public-houses and the drinking--tents at fairs in their owa hands. Four
measures of rice are mixed with 4 equal measures of phap, and to the mixture is added the
same bulk of water, the whole sufficing to fill a large earthenware vessel in which it is
allowed to remain for 4 days ; the liquor is then strained off, and will keep good for 8 days ;
it is acid and sickening, and an acquired taste is necessary for its appreciation. Sur is the
" table beer " of the country, brewed by the people in their homes, and is made in the same
way as chakti, but with kodra millet instead of rice, and a ferment called dhili, instead of
phåp. Dhili is a mixture of satu and various herbs kneaded into a cake without any ad.
mixture of water, and kept warm below a layer of barley straw for 20 days or so, when it
begins to smell, it is then dried, and is ready for use.



458
Kanet factions.
eclipse as a féte-day, feasting just as it takes place. On the Shivrátri
too they make an ox of flour and worship it and then the head of the
family shoots it in the belly with an arrow or cuts it with a sword, and
the pieces are distributed to all present, in spite of attempts to rescue
the image.*
In Sirmúr the Kanets are found throughout the State, but trans-Giri
only the Khash. The latter have an offshoot called Sharai from shara,
the Mohammadan Law, because their ancestor when hardpressed
acknowledged himself the Koli of his Muhammadan oppressors. The
Khash will give no daughters to the Sharai. Most of the Kanets in
Sirmúr are returned as Punwar.
The relative position of the different groups can hardly be stated
with precision. Thus in Kullu Proper the Khash rank higher than the
Rahu, despite the saying :
Bhashia, Khash bis,
Mán ek, báb bís.
• To every Khashia,t twenty Khash,
One mother, twenty fathers."
In Saraj the Kenets are polyandrous, yet they profess to look down on
the Kanets of Kullu Proper: and in the Simla Hills the Khash are in-
ferior to the true Kanets.
In the Kanaur tract of Bashahr, the Kanets are called JÁDS or Záds
and form a distinct sub-caste with which the Kanets of the lower ranges
do not, as a rule, intermarry or eat, though they will smoke and drink
with them. They are not at all particular about their food or drink,
and will actually eat yak-beef. These Kanets will be found fully
described under KANAURI.
Throughout Sirmúr and the Simla Hills there were until quite recent
times two great factions, the Shátis or followers of the Pandavas, and
the Báshis who were adherents of the Kauravas. Social intercourse
of any kind between these two groups was absolutely forbidden, but
they now intermarry, and so on. In Sirmúr the adherents of the
Kauravas are also called Sathors, those of the Pandavas Pasars. The
origin of these terms is lost in obscurity.
The Kanets are, or claim to be, of impure Rájput descent, but the
race is of diverse origin. In Kullu they are often classed by other
Hindus as on a par with the Ráthisg of Kángļa, and just as the latter
* In the Simla hills, four classes among the Kanets were said to rank higher than the rest
and are known as the Chár Khúndh. Their names are Bhaunthi, Parhíar, Chhippar, Balhir.
Other sub-divisions in those hills are:-Kohál, Gahru, Barúri, Chákar, Katlehru. Suráji.
Khash, Badní, Charolá, Badalwal, Jalánu, Rohal, Katálik, Pírwal, Janwal, Dolál, Rohana,
Kulhárnún, Norú, Laddogarh. But a large number of khels are now given as superior to
the rest of the Kanets.
+ Said to mean “female" (? Khas). The word Kbasha in Sanskrit is said to have
meant the country inbabited by the fourth class of the Hindus (? Súdras). It extended
from Kumaon to the Simla Hille.
+ The Básbis kept the Shirrátri on the 14th, the Shátís on the 15th of Pbágan,
f The Kanets rank well above the Ghirths in the hypergamy scale, for whereas a
Ghirthni becomes a queen in the 7th generation a Kanetni may aspire to that honour in
the 5th, which places the Kanets just below the Ráthis.



Kanet septs.
459
claim to be Rájputs, who have lost status by taking to the plough, or
the offspring of Rájputs by women of Súdra rank, so the Kanets say
that they are the children of women of the hills by Rajputs who came
up from the plains. On the other hand, another story makes the mass of
the Kullu population homogeneous and assigns both the Kanets and the
Dágis to one stock. Two sons of the demi-god, Bhím Sain, Pandava,
each had a son by a divughter of a Kullu rákshasa or demon. One of
these married a Bhotánti or Tibetan woman, who fed him on yák's flesh,
so that he and his children by her became Dagis. The other son was
the ancestor of the Kanets.
But if the mass of the Kanets claims descent from various Rajput
tribes, some, such as the Chibhar, from Kishtwar and Lahore, and the
Dogra, from Jammu, claim to be Brahmans by origin. Besides their
nebulous stalus groups the Kanets are divided into countless septs of
which only a few can be noticed here. More than 1,100 Kanet khels*
or septs are enumerated. The khel is quite distinct from the gotra
which is often, if not always, retained. The origin of some of the khels
is quite recent and well authenticated. Thus the Sain sept is descended
from Ránás of Kot Khái, Khaneti, Kumhársain and Delhat: the Maliára
sprang from a cadet branch of the ruling families of Bilaspur and
Nálagarh; and both, originally Rájputs by birth, have sunk to Kanet
status.
In Sirmur the Jaitki khel is so named from the village of Jaitak,
but it is said to be descended from a Khatri of. Sámána who espoused
a Kanetní.
From the Agnikula Rájputs have sprung the Agnibansi and Punwar
septs; and from the Punwar the Bhaunthi, Badhár, Baler, Khanoga
and Ramál septs.
The Tanwar or Tanúr Kanets are descended from Rajputs of that
clan and are found, chiefly, in Bághal, Mahlog and Kunbiár.
From the Chauhans are descended the Rahání, Namola, Biphrála.
Padhár, Padhán, Sádí, Chauhan, Chándal and Chandel septs, all
claiming Baldeo of Delhi as their progenitor. The Badhoi Kanets.
who are very numerous in the Simla Hills, are also said to be Chauhan:
they are divided into a number of sub-septs and can marry within their
own sept. Other septs are :-
1. Bharadwajet: this gotra pame is still in use, but it includes the
Batal and Mánlú (Kanet) septs and the Chanárú (Brahmans). Tradi.
tion says that once a Brahman máwi of Sonwal, a village in Koti.
had two sons who married Kanot brides. One settled at Mánlá village.
the other at Bhátlá, and they founded the Mánlú and Baţál septs.
Those of the family who remained Brahmans settled at Chanárí, a
village in Koți and are called Chanárú. 2. Kalál: a sept which takes
its name from Kelo, a village in Koţi, and gives its name to the Kalálthi
pargana of that State. 5. Chauhan, a sept which occupies the upper
valley of the Pábar in Jubbal, and is numerous in Keonthal, Sirmúr,
* The word khel is pronounced like kher, with the hard 1, in the Simla Hills. It may,
however, be identical with the Pashtu khel.
† The occurrence of this gotra game among the Gaddis and Ghirths also will be noted.



456
Kandera-Kanet.
KANDERA, the same as the dhunia or penja, or rather'a Hindu dhunia': but
see Kanera.
KANDHÁR, one of the phratries of the Rájputs in Karnal and like the
Mandhar, Panihár, Saokarwal and Bargujar descended from Lao.
Intermarriage between these tribes is forbidden on the ground of their
common descent.
KaŅdeánas, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KAŅDwó, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KANERA, (1) a mat-weaver but now a weaver of any kind (Multáni): (2)
the Kaneras form a small Muhammadan caste, found only on the lower
courses of the Sutlej and Chenáb, and on the Indus. They must be
distinguished from the Kandera or Penja of Delhi. They are a river
tribe, and their original occupation was plaiting mats from grass and
leaves, makirg string, and generally working in grass and reeds ; but
they have now taken to weaving generally, and even cultivate laud.
In Dera Ismáil Khan and Bannu, however, they still work in káthuá and
kander, of which they make mats and patalis for the roofs of houses, as
well as ropes. They are a low caste, slightly but only slightly superior
in standing and habits to the other grass-workers and tribes of the river
banks.“ A Kaneri by caste, and her name is Ghulam Fátina, and she is
au associate of the gentlemen of the desert (wild-pigs) !” (2) a Ját clan
(agricultural) found in Multán.
KANERÁN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KANET.--The Kanets are the yeoman peasantry of the eastern Himalayas in
the Punjab, and of the hills at their base. On the west they extend as
far as Bangahal and the eastern portion of the Kángra Valley, occupying
the whole of Kullu,* Mandi, Suket, the Simla Hill States and Sirmúr.
A few are also found east of the Sutlej in the Jhandbari iláqa of Hoshiar-
pur and the Kotáha Valley of Ambála is also held by them. In Kángra
Proper their place is filled by the Ghirths. The Rájpats are, generally
speaking, their over-lords, but in many places, especially in the Simla
Hills, they have retained their original independence and are directly
subordinate to the Rájput Rájás.
The common derivation of Kanet or Kanait is from kunit 'indiffer-
ence' or 'hostility' to the Shashtras, and the Rajputs or Chhatrís who
did not observe them strictly are said to have been called Kanait.'
Theịr lexity was mainly with regard to wedding and funeral rites and
in keeping widows as wives. Others say that the word is really kania
het or love for daughters' because Kanets did not kill their girl-child-
ren. The true Rájputs used to kill theirs at birth. Another suggestion
is that ait signifies 80118, just as aik sigoifies brothers and kinsmen,
e. g. Rámait means Rámu's sons and Ramaik his brothers and kin.
Now Rája Kans of the Puráns is called Kán in Paháři and his sons
would be called Kanait, but since Kans persecuted Brahmans and was
The Lahul48, or peasantry in Lahul, are b gioning to call themselves Kanets as they
become Binduized. See under Lahula. The Kanets of Láhul are said to be called " Jåd by
the Kanets of Kullu, but that cerm appears to be unkowo both in Libul and in Spiti.
-



457
Kanet groups.
looked upon as a dait (a deyil or rákshasa), he was killed and left
no descendants. Others say that Krishna, also called Kán in Pabári,
invaded Bashahr and advanced to Shurinatpur (now Sarahan); so his
descendants are Kanait. But neither suggestion appears tenable.
Speaking generally, the further we penetrate into the Hills the less
pure is the Kanet and the lower he stands in Hindu estimation. In the
Siwálik hills, in Sirmúr, below the Chaur Peak, in lower Suket, Mandi,
Nálágarh, Bilaspur, etc., the pure Kanets at least rank higher than those
in the upper hills of Kullu, Saraj and the other Simla States. The
latter in turn look down upon the Kanets whiuse country stretches from
the Nogri khad to Kanaur, and they in turn despise the Jads of
Kanaur itself.
In Kullu Proper, i.e., in the Kullu Valley, the Kanets have three groups
or grades : Khash, Ráhu and Niru*, the latter apparently confined to
the Dugi-Lag waziri in Kullu. Sir James Lyall, however, only noted
two divisions the Kassiya' and Ráo. The latter say that a Rájá of Kulla
ordered the Kanets to reform their loose practices, and conform altogether:.:.
to Hinduism ; those who obeyed were called Kassiyas and those who
stuck to their old ways, Ráos. It is a fact that at the present day the.
former are more Hindu in all their observances than the latter and the
story is otherwise probable, as one can see that the foreign priests round
the Rájás were always striving to make the Kullu people more orthodox
Hindus, greater respecters of Bralımans and less devoted to the worship
of their local divinities. The Kassiyas wear the janeo, and pretend to
some superiority which, however, is not admitted by the Rắos. They
intermarry and eat and drink together out of the same cooking-pots bat
not out of the same dish or plate. The late Mr. A. Anderson noted that
the Kassign were more common in Kulla proper and the Ráo in Saraj.
'The Kariets of the reinote Malána Valley will be found described urder
Rá Deo. According to Cunningham Ráos are also in possession of the
lower Pábar, Rúpin and Tons valleys in the Simla Hills, but these may
be the Ráhus of those Hills. They give their name to the petty fief
of Rawábin or Rawain.
In the Simla Hills the groups are Kanet, Khash, Ráhu and Kuran (? or
Katharal, the Khash ranking below the Kanet, who take their daighters
in marriage ; while both rank above the Rahu, who are votaries of Rahu.
and the Kuran, devotees of Ketu. These two latter groups keep an
* In Simja the Níru, Noro, Niúra, Nonu, Neonu and (or) Notu sept(s) are said to be old
Kanets and descended from the Kájputs of a tribe not specified who were máwis or
mnovannas, Brahmaps and Miáns or sõne of. Rájás who took Kanet wives. They often
intermarry with the Khash or Khosh. The Níru and Khosh do not intermarry with the
Rába and Kuran, though the two former eat food cooked by each other, and also with the
Rahu and Kuran except at times of sútak and pútak. In Kulla and Bashahr the Ráhn and
Karan cook food on an angetha or stove, while the Níru and Khosh usc chúlas, but this is .
custom rather than a caste distinction. The Rahu and Koran disregard the rue.ot mith..
ie, they can drink from the same cup. With them demise mourning ends after three
days, and on the 5th they kill a goat. These Ka Daits can cohabit with a Kolin, if they
keep her in a separate honge, and any son by her will be a servant in the family but
canuot claim inheritance. But a Dági woman cannot be kept, as the Dáciis ipførior in
coate to the Koli. These Kanaits eat the flesh of the awe, bhefi. They can marry the
maternal uncle's or father's sister's danghter. They are found in Kulla and Bashahr but
there are very few to the south of the Nogri. The Ráhu and Karan hardly differ at all.
They intermarry and eat together during sútak and patak. Shu is said to be derived from
Ráhu the son-devouring dragon, or, in Kolu Proper, from mahu, a bee.



462
The Kullu Kanets.
Kullu among all tribes at the present day is pagvand, or, as it is here
called, mundevand, that is, all legitimate sons of one father get an equal
share without reference to the number of sons born of each wife or
mother. Among the Kanets and the lower castes the real custom hitherto
has been that every son by a woman kept and treated as a wife was
legitimate. It was not necessary that any ceremony should have been
performed. If no one else claimed the woman, and she lived with the
man as a wife, the son born from such covabitation was legitimate. In
the same way among the same classes a pichlag, or posthumous son
(called ronda in Kullu), born to a widow in the house of a second husband,
is considered the son of the second husband ; and a widow cannot be
deprived of her life tenure of her husband's estate for want of chastity
so long as she does not go away to live in another man's house. It
appears to be a general idea in Kullu that a father could, by formal deed
of gift execated in his lifetime, give his estate to a daughter, in default
of sons, without consent of next of kin. It is, I think, doubtful also
whether a distant kinsman (say, more than three or four generations
apart) could claim against a daughter without gift, and, it seems,
generally allowed that a ghar jawái or son-in-law taken into the house
becomes after a tine entitled to succeed as a kind of adopted son
without proof of gift': (Lyall, § 115).
Polyandry pow prevails only in Saráj, and there the custom seems to
be tending to fall into disuse. It is in reality a inere custom of com-
munity of wives among brothers who have a community of other goods,
In one house you may find three brothers with one wife, in the next three
brothers with four wives, all alike in common; in the next house there
may be an only son with three wives to himself. It is a matter of means
and of land; a large farm requires several women to look after it.
Where there is only one wife to several brothers it will generally be
found that some of the brothers are absent for part of the year working
as laborers. In former years I nave seen perplexing claims arise from
tbis custom. The solis or grandsons of a family which has lived in
polyandry agree to divide the ancestral estate, and quarrel as to the
shares, some saying that each son should get an equal share, others that
the sons of each mother (where the fathers had several wives in common)
should get an equal share, others that the song of each putative father
should get an equal share. Of late years such disputes have seldom
arisen, as it has become a pretty generally recognised principle that, as
far as our courts are concerned, the woman in these cases is the wife
only of the eldest son or head of the family, and all sods she may bear
must be presumed to be his. This principle agrees in results with, what
I believe to have been in former times, the general rule of inheritance,
as between the children of brothers all living in community of wives
(but it must be confessed that no one custom seems to have been rigidly
followed in all cases) ; on the other hand, as between the children of
brothers all of whom did not live in community of wives, the old custom
of the country was, 1 believe, as follows :-If of three brothers, one
separated off his share of the estate and set up for himself, and the other
two lived on in cominon and a son was born in their house ; then such
son was considered to be the child of two fathers and heir to the estato
of both : the separated brother or his children could claim no share of
such estate on the death of either of the united brothers. This appears



The Kullu Kanets.
463
n of made up iphond duer
to me to have been the custom in past times, but it is opposed to the
principle, above mentioned as at present in for of only recognising the
mother to be the wife of one of the brothers, and I am not aware that it
has been ever affirmed by our courts.* Lyall, § 117.
A corpse is burnt ordinarily on the day following the death, before
the cremation it is covered with a cloth, and the musicians play. If
the deceased is of good family his ashes are at once taken to Hardwár,
whatever the season of the year: otherwise they are kept till the
winter, when a party is made up to convey to the Ganges the ashes of
all who have died in the neighbourhond during the summer. The for-
mal funeral ceremonies (the gati) are performed on the tenth day
after death, when the deceased's clothes are divided among the
officiating Brahmans and the Kumhárs who provide the earthen pots
for the funeral. On the 13th day (pachi) a goat is sacrificed and
is eaten at a feast by the relatives of the family. Kanets of the lower
class (the Raos) perform all these ceremonies on one day, the third after
the death. In some places it is usual after a cremation to make a small
foot-bridge over running water somewhere in the neighbourhocd to
help the passing of the soul of the deceased. On the fourth anniver-
sary of the death the chaubarkha feast is celebrated, and until then
the widow, if faithful to the memory of the dead, should remain in
mourning and refrain from wearing her orpaments, she is forbidden for
ever to wear again her gold nose-ring and bulák.
"The Kullu people are good humoured among themselves but rough
ard inhospitable to strangers, very shy and distrustful of any new officer
but almost fond of one they know well, very submissive to constituted
authority if exercised with any tact, not given to theft, and not much to
falsehood ; but this is partly the result of a simplicity or want of cunning
which does not see how a fact perfectly well known to the questioned
person can be concealed from the questioners. On the other hand, they
are not so industrious, so frugal, or so enterprising as the Kángra people
and they are still more superstitious. That they have imagination is
proved by many of their legends and fairy tales which contain as much
of that quality as any in the world. Their sense of the picturesque is
proved by the situation they chose for their temples, by the wild stories
they attach to each cave, lake, frowning cliff, rugged rock, or waterfall.
to explain the impression which its form produces on their minds. Theň
are very fond of music ; the tunes, which are quick and lively, remind
one of Irish jigs or Scotch reels. The women sing a great deal, and
rhyming songs are made at each marriage or funeral, or in commemo.
ration of any remarkable event. As a general rule, one line in each
couplet is not original and has no reference to the subject in hand. It
belongs, in fact, to a collection of old lines, which is used as a common
stock by all the poets of the country, like a Gradus ad Parnassum.
This is a splendid invention for reducing the difficulty of rhyming
which keeps so many poets mute in other countries. Their heads are
full of strange fancies about things spiritual ; for instance, they believe
*!Among the Kanets of Kodh Sowár, i. e., in Bangahal the vands or separate holdinga
were indivisible, so that if the owner of a single rand died it went to his kanna or younCOM
son, while if he held two, the other went to his next youngest, and so on. The elder sono
went out into the world and took service with the Rajs or elsewhere, earning a grant of
land thereby, while the younger sons remained at home and succeeded."



468
Marriage in Bashahr.
Formal marriage is not, however, universally observed even by
Brahmans or Rájputs, on the one hand: while, on the other, even Bániás
in townships observe the rites in vogue among Brahmans of the higher
classes. Brahmans in the villages only observe the lagan phera.
Among the Rájputs the Thákurs who live in villages and marry in
their own class omit the lagan phera, as do the agricultural Khash,
but Thákurs who aspire to Míáp status, and the upper classes among
the Khash, do observe it. In brief formal marriage is confined to
families resident in a bázâr or township or connected with the Bashahr
darbár.
Customary marriage.
Customary marriage is usually observed by the Thákurs and Khash
who perform no lagan vedí rites, but simply worship the dwár-mátri*,
the hearth, and the nine planets. Collectively these observances are
called shank-bhari.t These are the binding ingredients in the rite, al-
though if a girl is being married to several husbands, the attendance
of one only is indispensable.
Another form of customary marriage with a maid, who is wooed and
won from a fair or a place of pilgrimage, is prevalent among the Khash
and Karán. It is solemnised by worsbip of the door and hearth, and
by the andarera or andrela,f and the pair are regarded as bride and
bridegroom.
If the girl's parents have a husband in view, but she is forcibly
carried off from a fair or elsewhere by another man, they will never-
theless go to her wedding and give her a dower in money, clothes, etc.,
while the bridegroom gives his motber-in-law, father, or brother-
in-law a present in cash.
The consideration paid by the bridegroom to the bride's guardians is
called dheri, and if from any cause the marriage is dissolved this sum
must be refunded to the bridegroom. The man who abducts or seduces
a married woman is liable for the payment of the dhere to her first hus.
band. Moreover, if she has a child by her first husband and takes it
with her, the second husband becomes liable for this child's mainte.
nance; but it does not inherit its step-father's property.
An upmarried woman who gives birth to a child is called bahbí or
bahri, and the child, who is called játú or jhátú, has no right whatever,
if she marry, in her husband's property..
* The dwarsmátri arə seven nymphs, who reside in the doors; their names are as fol.
lows : Kalyani, Dhanadá, Nandá, Punnyá, Funyamukhi, Jayá or Vijaya. The whole group
is called Dwár-mátri.
+ From Sanskrit shákhochchára, the recitation of the bride's and bridegroom's got, skákhá
(whence the name), and parvara. Hence this rite corresponds to the gotrachár of the plains.
Brahmans are paid for this recitation. Twice-born castes observe the skákhochchár, while
the fourth class, that is the-Kanets, call the wedding ceremony the shankh.bhari.
Said to be the Sapszrit vadhúipravesh, the observance by which a lawfully married wife
enters her husband's house at an auspicious time, with music and singing.
§ Customary marriage is not permissible ainong the twice-born castes, and if such a
marriage occur, the issue are only entitled to maintenance, or to a field or shop (for main-
tenance) without power of alienation : but such issue may succeed in default of fully
legitimate issue or agnates,



.
nz
Death-rites in Bashahr.
489
Observances at Death.
The alms given at death are called khat-ras,* deva dán, gáu dán,
baitarni dán, and panch ratn, and are offered by all castes.
A máli or nachhatri, called the ashánti, can predict the fates of those
who accompany the bier. The máli is a worshipper of ghosts (mashán
and bhút). He is not a Brahman, but a Kanet, or even a man of low
caste ; and he predicts after consulting his book of divination (ginne ki
kitáb).
In the villages of Bashahr are men who can foretell deaths. Such a
man is called a musháni. They differ from the máli.
Chelás (lit. disciples) in Bashahr are called mális of the deotát and
in order to ascertain if a man, woman or child is under a donnon's in-
fluence, the demon's máli is called in, Taking some rapeseed in his
band he predicts the period within which the patient will recover. If
the latter regains his health, a bali is offered to the demon,
- Bakrá sundháf is performed after 13 days among Brahmans, and
15 among Rájputs, while Kanets perform it after 15 or even after 10
days. If the proper day chances to be ina uspicious the observance is
held a day earlier or later. The Brahman bhojan, or feast given to
Brahmans, is called dharmshánti, and after it the twice-born castes
are considered purified.
The máski, is a shrádh held one lunar month after the death. The
chhe-wáski is held six months after it.
The barashwá is beld on the first anniversary, and on it alms, inclad-
ing a shayyáſ, a palanquin, horse, eto., are given to the family Acháraj
or, in villages, to the Krishna Brahmans. A similar shradh is held on
the second and third anniversaries. On the fourth is held the chau-
barkhi. Tha soul goes through three pbases, práni, pret and rishet,l!
and on the completion of the fourth year it is purified and becomes a
pitar deotá. In addition the párbaná9 and kúningat ahrádhs are ob-
served for four or five generations.
The deceased is also worshipped among the twice-born castes as a
godling, sati, páp or newa ; and among others an image is made of
stone or of silver, for which some grain is set apart at each harvest, and
# Rhat-rus dan generally called dashadán, the gift of ten things vix., a cow, (2) land, (3)
segamum, (4) gold, (b) clarified butter (ghi), (6) a cloth, (7) unpounded rice, (8) sugar,
19) silver, 110) salt. Ant dan is a gift made, given by the son on his father's breathing
his last. Dev-dán is to offer some gift to the deities. Those who receive the death. bed gifts
from Brahmans and Rajputs are called Acháraj or Mahá. Brahmans, and those who receive
the death-bed gifts from other castes are termed Krishan Brahmaps.
+ The mális are exorcists as well, and also give oracles.
* Bakrá means a goat, sacrificed 15 days" after a death, and sundhá means assafætida,
which is never eaten until the ceremony called bakrá (and) sundhá has been performed.
& Shayya means bedding. In the shayya-dán the following articles are given ; a cot
bedding, quilt, bed-sheet, cooking vessels, dish, male and female attire, and ornaments,
all according to one's means.
Il For one year after death the soul is called pret, and from the second year to the fourth it
is called rishet, from rishi, a sage.
a The párvan shradh is that which is performed on a parbi, such as an eclipse, on the
8th and 14th of the dark half of a month, at ab amúras or a púranmást. And the kshayah,
or ekodist shradh is that which is observed annually on the date of the death.



466
Marriage in. Bashahr.
served among the three higher castes, and since recent times by some
of the Khash.
Women whose children die prematurely have recourse to various
charms, but the favourite remedy is 'the worship of the Ashtam Ráhu,
especially in cases of ashțamráh* or falling sickness, to which children
are liable.
The first tonsure (locally called kanbál)? is done at the kuldeota's
temple alone. It is observed by the twice-born castes on a day fixed
by a purohit or pádha: and by other castes with the deotá's permission.
2. Marriage.--Ritual marriage is confined to the ruling family and
to some Darbárís, Brahmans and Bániás of Rámpur town. Amongst
them a betrothal once made is irrevocable, except on account of leprosy,
constant ill-health or apostasy on the bridegroom's part, or in the event
of his committing a crime.
As soon as the date of the wedding is fixed, the preparations for it
are begun on an auspicious day. The commencement of the wedding
is called the sarbárambh.I A kangná is tied round the bridegroom's
wrist, and after that he must not go outside the house. Ganpati is
then worshipped, and batná is rubbed on the bodies of both bride and
bridegroom for three to five days, according to the means of the family.
Worship of the Kuljá, i.e., the boy's family god, is then performed.
When the marriage party sets out, the bridegroom is garlanded, but
those of his family who are under the influence of gharastak (Sanskr.
grihastak, “ family') must not see the garland or it will bring them bad
luck. The cost of the garland as well as the expenses of the graha
shanti|| are borne by the bridegroom's maternal uncle.
After the departure of the wedding party the women observe the
marohá or parowán, but this is not known in the villages. This cus.
tom, general throughout the Hills, is confined to the women because
all the men have gone on the wedding procession. The women per-
form the wedding rites at the bridegroom's house, one representing the
priest, others the bride and bridegroom, and so on, with songs and
dances.
When the bridegroom reaches the bride's house the parents meet
first-an observance called milniaand the bridegroom must not see his
narents- or sister-in-law until the lagan pherá rite has been solemnised.
* If Ashtamrah or asht mránú, that is, the planet Ráhu (the eighth gráh) is at the eighth
place from the lagná in which the boy was born, brings sickness to him ; and to avert this
Ráhu must be worshipped. Since the eighth place from the janma-lagná (birth lagná) is
that of Death, there is danger of sickness if it is occupied by Rábu, Shani and Mangal
grahas,
+ Ranbúl, from Sanskrit. karnavedhú, meaning boring of ears, is the ceremony in which
the ears are pierced for the insertion of earrings. The Kuladevatá and Ganpati are wor-
shipped,
* From Sanskrit sarb, all, and árambh, commencement.
šie, a shehrá is placed on the bridegroom's head. Children by a former wife are forbid.
den to see their father put on the shehrá on the occasion of his second marriage; throughout
the Hills, children by a former wife are not allowed to see their father in the guise of a
bridegrocm.
!! Graha shanti or worship of the nine planets.
☺ Parohá or parowán appears to be derived from pauráná, to send to sleep.



Marriage in Bashahr.
467
At this rite he recites chhands * There come the sir.gondi, menhdi and
oiling of the bride. After worshipping Ambiká and performing jaljátrát
the bridegroom's sihrá is untied by his best man, who must be a re-
lative. The wedding concludes with the untying of the bride's kangná
by a man who is regarded as a great friend of the bridegroom.
The bride returns to her father's house three weeks or a month after
the wedding. This is called the dwirágaman, and sometimes costs
one-fourth of the amount spent on the actual wedding,
Dower.
Only among the twice-born castes does a bride receive dower, stri.
dhan. This includes the presents made to her by her father and hus-
band, and the gifts made to her by her mother-in-law and others at the
end of the wedding ceremony.
The Bashahr State has recently bestowed two villages on the two
Deís of Bashahr who were married to the Rájá of Káshipúr. The 'in-
come of these two villages will go to the two Deís at Káshipúr, and to
their offspring after their death.I Occasionally the chief or a ráni
gives dower to a Brabman girl. She is then called a kankori, and is
regarded as the donor's own daughter. Even poor men give a daughter
some dower according to their means. Locally this is called sambhal,
a term which includes any present made to a married daughter on
certain occasions.
* Some of the chhands recited by the bridegroom are given below:-
1. Chhand pakáún chand pakátn,
Chand pakaigá bírá,
Barát áí chándni Jamái,
Ayá láſá hírá.
2. Chhand pakáún chhand paká ún,
Chhand pakiaga khauma,
Tumhári beți ko aisá rakhún,
Jaisá ánkhon men surmá.
3. Chhand pakiúm chhand pakáúm.
Chhand pakáigá rorá,
Dúsrá chhand tab kahún,
Jo saurá dewe ghorá.
4. Chhad pagaga chhad pagaga,
Chhand pagaga thala,
Dúsrá chhand tab kahúngá,
Jab saura degá sálí.
I recite a metre like the betel leaf,
The wedding procession has arrived, the canopy is pitched,
The bridegroom is like a diamond.
I recite a metre sweet like a sweet.
I will keep your girl as well
As (women keep) lamp-black in tho eyes.
I recite à metre as hard as a stone,
The next metre will recite
When the father-in-law gives me a horse,
I recite a metre as fine as a metal dish,
The next metre will recite
When my father-in-law gives me my wife's sister also.
Chhand means quatrains; but they also recite some couplets or doha.
+ This "pilgrimage to a spring" is made on the fourth day after the wedding.
" It seems quite opposed to all custom," wrote Sir Jamos Lyall, "for a Hindu Rájá to
give territory as dower with a daughter," Kángra Şett. Rep., $ 129. No doubt the custom is
wusual but under certain circumstances it clearly exists.



464
The Bashalar people.
in the soul leaving the body during sleep, and account in this way for
dreams : in these wanderings they say the soul can hold converse with
the spirits of deceased persons, and communications are often received
in this way. Both men and women are very susceptible of the passion
of love, and do wild things under its influence. They will run off and
live together in a cave in the mountains till forced down by the pangs of
starvation. Men of the best families constantly incur imprisonment or
loss of office for breaches of marriage laws, or soaal outlawry for the
enke of some low caste woman. They are not manly or martial in
manner, but I doubt if they can be called a cowardly race. I have seen
them attack bears and leopards without firearms in a rather courageous
way.'* Apart from the jollifications at the fairs, the people, evea the
children, have fow amusements. A game called chagols or “sheep and
panthers” is sometimes played with pebbles for pieces on a rough sort
of chessboard chalked on a rock.
To describe the religious ideas of the Kanets would be tantamount to
giving an account of modern Hinduism in the Himalayas. But to show
the curious natures of their superstitions it is worth while to describe an
expiatory ceremony, which is occasionally performed with the object of
removing grah or bad luck or evil influence which is supposed to be brood-
ing over a hamlet. The deota of the place is, as usual, first consulted
through the chela and declares himself also under the spell, and advises
a jag or feast, which is given in the evening at the temple. Next morbir.g
a man goes round from house to house with a kilta or creel on his back,
into which each family throws all sorts of odds and ends, pairing
of nails, pinches of salt, bits of old iron, handfuls of grain, etc.;
the whole community then turns out and circumambulates the village,
at the same time stretching an unbroken t'lread round it fastened to
pegs at the four corners. This done, the man with the creel carries it
down to the river-bank, and empties the contents therein, and a sheep,
fowl, and some small animals are sacrificed on the spot. Half the sheep
is tb e perquisite of the man who dares to carry the creel, and he is also
entertained from house to house on the following night.
TAE PEOPLE OF BASHAAR STATE.
The Bashahris or people of Bashanr, the Simla Hill State which lies
most remote from the Punjab proper, differ in their customs 80 materi.
- ally from the peoples of the other Simla Hill States that it is necessary
to describe them separately. While the mass of the population is
Kanet, Rájputs or Țhákurs, Brahmans and the low castes of the Simla
Hills are also well represented in Bashahr, but the customs of the
people as a whole are those of the Kanets, the dividing line between the
different castes being very indistinct. The following account of the
people of Bashahr is from the pen of Pandit Tíka Rám Joshi. It excludes
the customs of Kanaur, for which reference must be made to KANAURI.
The Kanets of Basbahr appear to be divided into two hypergamous
sub-castes (groups) :-
(i) Khash.
(ii) Karáo, or Rábu, from whom the Khash take daughters but do
- not give them brides in return.
* Lyall's Kángra Sett. Rep.,, § 11.8, The rest of the above account is from that work or
thu Kullu Gazetteers,



Customs in Bashahr.
465
There is also a third, a sectarian group, the Ganesha, so called be-
cause they adore the deity Ganesh.
The Kanets were originally Thákurs, but lost status by adopting
widow remarriage.
The Brahmans of Bashabr are divided into three grades :-
(2) Uttam, who do not plough. .
(ii) Acbáraj, who receive the ashubh dán or impure alms of the
other Brabmans and Rájputs. They take daughters in
marriage from the
(iii) Krishna, who plough..
Like the other two twico-born castes most of the Brahmans in Bashahr
are sirtorás and not of purs descent. Those that are of pure blood may
be divided into two grades :-
(a) The State purohits, who intermarry, and eat kachhi with the
purohits of Ráņwí, a village of Brahmans who are priests
to the Rájá, and Brahmans as well as with those of Dwarch
and Singrá.
(6) Bázár purohits.
All the twice-born castes will eat pakkí with one another, and even
from the Khash and Karán Kanets; but they never do so with the
Krishna group of the Brahmans.
Observances at :
1. Birth. During pregnancy the kuldeotá is worshipped, if neces-
sary, and between the seventh and eighth months the Ashtam Ráhu is
also worshipped,* but these observances are confined to the twice-borp
castes and to the better class of the Khash Kanets. Brahmans predict
the child's sex by counting a handful of almonds, odd numbers indicat-
ing a boy, oven a girl. The birth of a girl passes unnoticed, but that
of a boy is the occasion for festivities and almsgiving. As a rule the
midwife is a woman of low caste, but sometimes Karán women aro 80
employed. During the last five months of pregnancy the midwife
massages the woman at the end of each month to keep the foetus in
position.
The gontrálá is observed by Brahmans, Rájputs and Vaisyas after
11, 18 and 15 days, respectively. Some of the Khash also observe it.
On the expiry of this period the family is deemed clean again, and
other families of the tribe can eat with them. The mother is also puri.
fied after the gontrálá. The impurity only lasts three days among the
monial tribes.
The ceremony of feeding the child for the first time is called lugrú,
and is observed at an auspicious moment, with worship of Ganpati and
the nine planets, and various festivities.
The child is named at the annodak,t and as usual given two games.
This is done when it is five or six months old as a rule. Nátwa is ob-
* Simply by making gifts to priests and other Brahmans.
† At which the child is fod for the first time on grain and water. (From Sanskr. unna
grain, and udak, water).



470
Temples in Bashahr.
sometimes a he-goat is sacrificed and liquor drunk, the belief being that
omission to keep up the worship of the dead will end in disaster.
Brahmans and Rájputs observe the sapindana, sapindi shrádh and
karchhú. In the latter rite khir (rice, milk and sugar) is prepared, and
a Mahábrahman is fed with it. Then the corpse is put in a shroud and
carried out to the burning ground. On the road pinds are given to
ensure immunity to the deceased, and an earthen vessel is also broken.
A lamp is kept burning till the kiriá, to light the soul on its dark road,
and the dharm-ghața placed beside it to quench its thirst.*
Cults in Bashahr.
The temples in Bashahr are of undoubted antiquity, and those of
Nirt, Nagar and the Four Theris (see p. 471) are said to date back to
the Tretá-yug; those at Kharáhan and Súngrá in Bhába parganá and
at Chúgáoņ in Kangur to the Dwápar-yug. Most of them were
originally constructed in those periods.
The temple servants are the kárdár or manager, pujári, bhanơári,
ļokrú, máth, kayath, málit and bajantrí.
In the villages the term pujárí or deatú † is applied to those who
carry the deotá's car or rath, as well as to those who accompany the
deotá to their villages.
At Shungrá, Chúgáon and Grámang in Kanaur are temples of the
three Maheshras. Grámang is a village in Bhábá parganá also called
Kath-gáoņ.
The bajantrí are drummers or musicians and get grain, a he-goat
(and sometimes a shroud at a death) for their services. Others offer a
cloth, called sháriſ, to the temple for the decoration of the god's rath,
The pujáris ordinarily belong to the first class of Kanets. The
bhandari is the storekeeper. The tokrú's duty is to weigh, and the
function of the wáth or máhas is to ask oracles of the deity on behalf
of the people.
The gods of the village-temples are subordinate to the god of a Deo
mandir or “ great temple," and they perform certain services for him,
e. g., at a yag|| and at fairs, in return for the fiefs (jagirs) granted
them by him.
Similarly the temples at Gúngrál and Kharáhan contain subordinate
deotás, and a Deo mandir usually possesses one or more birg** to whom
food and sacrifice are offered, and who are also worshipped.
Further in the temple of a village-god will generally be found two
cars, one for the presiding god, the other for bis subordinate, or kotuál.
* A person of the same name and ráshi as the deceased must not accompany the bier,
and should perform a graha-dán for his own protection.
t Here málí means the man called dinwán in these hills, and grokch in Kanaur.
# Deotús are those who worship the deity; they are also called pujáris. Deotús are
· especially those who carry the rath of the deity, and cause him to dance.
§ Sharí a dhoti-cloth or piece of cloth attached to the car of the deity.
Sanskrit yaina, a sacrifice.
In turn Maheshwar of Súngrá is subordinate to Bhima Káli at Sarshan.
** Bir is par cæcellence the deity Mahabir, that is Hanúmán; Bhairab is also termed a
Bír. Lánkſábír too is a Bhairab deity.



Religious days in Bashahr.
471
The Káli pújans are called kheriá-kári* in Bashahr, and include the
Pret Pújá, Pekar, and Sarvamandal pujans. They are observed in
Sáwan or Plágan, and the yag or observance is paid for from the jágír
of the deity or from funds supplied by his deotúst (devotees), who also
give grain, ghi, oil and he-goats. On an auspicious day chosen by a
Brahman as many as 50 he-goats are sacrificed, and the people of the
neighbourhood are foasted, the priests and deotús receiving the goats'
neigds and fee, with some Bashahr the Shánd yg ing. Sometime to the
The Shándi yagood crop or an epid sacrifices are als he live sthansę
The Shándi yag. In Bashahr the Shánd yag is celebrated where
there has been a good crop or an epidemio is raging. Sometimes 108
balis, sometimes less, are offered, and sacrifices are also made to the
ten dishas or quarters. The gods of the four theris and the five sthans
(lemples) also assemble at it and other gods from the country round
attend the yag. The expense incurred is considerable. In Bashahr
the people also perform the shánd for their own villages.
A minor yag, called Shándțu or Bhátpur|| is also observed every
third year, but not universally. Brahmans perform worship and are
feasted.
· Less important yags are the jágrás and jațágrás which are observed
annually or every tbird or fourth year. The biggest, that of Mahesh-
war of Súngrá, is held every third year at Nachár. temple, with the
following rites :-
Balis (sacrifices) of he-goats are offered on all four sides, and at
night a combat takes place between the villagers and the gawále,** who
are armed with large wooden clubs " having fire burning at the ends."
The combat lasts all night. The women sing, dance and make merry,
and are feasted in return.
In Bashahr the Diáoli is observed in Magbar. It is the special festi-
val of the peasantry, and held only in the village temples. Women
observe it by visiting their parents' homes and their eating cold viands.
The Kháppá, held on the 15th of Poh in Bashahr, resembles the
Discli in that State. It is probably the festival called Khwákohá in
Kanaar.
The Jal Játrátt held in Jeth in Bashahr is the occasion on which the
thákurs are bathed in the rivers with songs and music, for which the
performers are rewarded.
* 8o-called because some khir (rice boiled in milk) is offered to the deity Káli. Pret.
pújan is the worship of ghosts. Teikar and Sarbumándal.pujan is the worship of all the
deities at one place.
† Deotús here are the persons to whom the Doots belongs, not the pújáris,
From shánti, peace.
$ Those are enumerated in the couplet: Lándsa, Dándsa, Singat, Saner - Nirt, Nagar,
Nirmand, Káo, Mamel. The villages of Landsá, Dindsa, Singra and Saneri, are the four
theris ; and Nirt, Nagar, Nirmand, Káo and Mamel are the five stháns. Kao and Mamel are
both in Suket, Nirmand in Kulla, and all the rest are in Bashahr. Báo has a tomple of Devi,
Marzel one to Mahadev. Nirmand has two temples, otie of the goddess Nrimunda, and the
other of Parasrám. In Nirt is a temple to Súraj (the sun).
ll So-called because boiled rice (that) is offered to the deity.
| Jațágrá, a small jágrá.
** Cattle-grazers.
It Jal Játrá, a visit to a spring. Here thakur means " deity" or "deoid,"



Superstitions in Bashahr.
In Bashahr at the Jal or Ban Bibár the thákurs' chariots are carried
out into the gardens, and alms given to Brahmans, musicians, etc.
The Rám-naumi is called Dharm-kothi* in Bashahr, and is the coca-
sion for general rejoicings, the thakurs' thrones being decorated with
heaps of flowers, and many thousands of rupees spent.
In Bashahr the Baisákbí is called Lahol, and the girls who marry
tbeir dolls in Párbati's name are given money by the State or from the
bazar.
As in the Simla Hills, generally, the abandonment of land is called
sog or mandokri. When a house or field is believed to be occupied by
a demon it is regained by sacrificing a he-goat in the name of his mane.
But even then a cultivated field so regained cannot be ploughed, and
nust only be used for pasture.
• An oath in Bashahr is termed dib. It is administered when it is
impossible to find out the truth of a case, and there is no reliable evi-
dence. One party agrees to take the oath. First he has a cold bath.
Then he goes to the temple and says that if he is in the right he ought
to be successful, but if unsuccessful, in the wrong. Two balls of kneaded
flour, une containing a silver coin, aod the other a gold piece, are put
in a narrow vessel full of water, and the man is bidden to take one ball
out. It is then broken, and if it contains the silver, he is sopposed to
be successful, and if the gold, he is deemed to have failed.
A man can be released from an oath by the thál darohi, which con-
sists in making a present to the Rájá and also performing & yag, i.e.,
sacrificing a he-goat in honour of the god.
The 14th of the dark half of Bhá lon is termed Krishan chaudas or
Dagyslí-chaudas (froin Dag-wálí-chaudas); and on that day the wor.
ship of Káli is observed. It is a general belief in the Panjab hills that
some women are Dágs or Dáins, that is to say that a sight of them is
not lucky, or in other words they know some incantations by which
they can assume the form of a tiger or vulture, and that any beautiful
thing whicb comes into their sight is destroyed. The 14th of the dark
half of Bhádo is their feast day, and they then assemble in the Beas
Kund in Kullu, or at some other place, such as the Karol bill, which
lies between Solan and Kándághát. Some mustard seed is thrown on
to the fields so that the Dág may not destroy the crops. On that day
no man goes' out from fear of the Dág, and on each house door some
thorns are stuck with cow-dung, so that the Dág may not enter.
If a part of a field is left while being sown, worship is made on the
spot and a he-goat sacrificed because it is uolucky to leave a bit bejindir
(banjar, uncultivated).
KANG. -A tribe of Játs, found chiety in the angle between the Beas and
Satlej, though they have crossed the latter river into Ambala and
Perozepur, and are apparently found in small numbers all along ito
Banks and even on the Lower Indus. Their tradition is that they came
om Garh Ghazni, but in Amritsar they say they were first settled in
perved. It wali-chaudalis termed
* It is so called because on this occasion the Dharm-kothi or 'store house of charity'
remains open to all, and everyone is given food from it for a week or so.



473
Kang-Káng.chimpa.
Kbirpur, near Delhi. They occupied a position of some considerable
political importance in their own tract during the early days of Sikh
rule. Mr. Barkley wrote of the Jullundur Kang :" Most of the Sikh
Sardárs of the Nakodar tahsil either belong to this tribe, or were con-
nected with it by marriage when they established their authority there.
Tára Singh Gheba (sic), who was their leader at the time of the conquest,
Was himself of this race and a native of Kang on the Sutlej. where it is
said that eighteen Sardárs at one time resided ; but on the village being
swept away by the river they dispersed themselves in their separate
jágírs on both sides of the river.” The Kang are said to claim descent
from the Solar Rájputs of Ajudhia througb their ancestor Jogra, father
of Kang, and in Amritsar give the following pedigree :-
Rám Chandar.
Lahu.
Ghaj.
Harbam.
(according to the Sialkot tradition Jogra
Talochar.
had four sons, Rai, Natt, Kang and Abala
Shah.
who founded as many septs.)
Mal.
Jogra.
Kang.
Bábá Malha, son of Mángu, 6th in descent from Kang, fell in fight
with the Kheras on the spot which still marks a village boundary, and
he is now worshipped, Mirásís taking the offerings made to him. Kangs
and Kheras still refuse to intermarry.
KANG, a Hindu Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
BANG, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KÁNG-CHIMPA, lit. great house.' The head of the family in Spiti, who is
priinarily responsible for the revenue, the corvée and the share of com-
mon expenses demandable on the whole holding. He is ordinarily the
eldest son as primogeniture prevails, but it does not follow that his
father is dead, for by custom the father retires froni the headship of
the family when his eldest son is of full age and has taken to himself &
wife, On each estate (jeola) there is a kind of dower house with a plot
of land attached to which the father in these cases retires. When 10
stalled there, he is called the kang-chungpá or small-house-man,
Sometimes in the absence of a living father, the widowed mother, or
the grandfather, or an uncle, aunt or unmarried sister, occupies the
small house and the land attached to it. A person occupying a separate
house of even lower degree is called yang-chungpa, and is always some
relation of the head of the family : he may be the grandfather who has
been pushed out of the small house by the retirement of his own son,
the father, but it is commoner to find unmarried sisters, aunts, or their
illegitimate offspring in this position.*
* In Pín kothi or village the bozan families, descendants of monks of orders which per.
mit marriago, commonly bold a house and a small plot from the family from which they
sprang, and aro in the position of a yung-chungpa. For the fiscal torms on which tho
kang and yángochungpas hold, see Lyall's Kángfa Settlement Rep., § 148.



474
Káng.chumpa-Kanjar.
KÁNG-CHOMPA, a cottager or farm servant in Lánul. Like the cháksi, the
kang-chumpa does not appear to be a mere tenant on the garhpán or
demesne lands of the Thákurs, but holds on the same tenure as the yulfa
or dotoen, i.e as a subordinate proprietor. The káng-chumpa, however,
pays no rent and do private service only for the Thákur. His holding
is a quarter of a jeola or less, as against the half or whole jeola of a
cháksi and the one or two of a dotoen. The family in possession of a
holding of this kind is bound to furnish one man or woman for continu-
ous work at the Thákur's house or on his garlpár land. The person
in attendance gets food and does work of any kind. Those who live at
a distance work on the garhpán land near them, but are also bound to
feed a sheep for the Thákur during the winter. Some kang-chumpas
now pay Rs. 5 a year in lieu of service.
KANGAB, KINGAR.—The Kangar is a travelling hawker, but he confines his
traffic to small articles of earthenware such as pipe-bowls, and especially
to those earthen images in which native children delight. These he
makes himself and hawks about for sale. But Baden-Powell gives at
p. 267 of his Punjab Manufactures a long account of an operation for
a new nose said to be successfully performed by the Kangars of Kángfa.
According to Mr. H. L. Williams the Kingar are also called Ale Bhole
and are Muhammadans, often suspected of petty pilfering from thresh-
ing-floors and hen-roosts; a primitive race whose conditions of life
resemble the Kuchband.
KANGIÁRA, a got or section of the Telis.
KANGRAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KANAía, or Ghania, the fifth of the Sikh misls or confederacies which was
recruited from Játs. It derived its name from Ghani, a village near
Lahore.
Kanál, a tribe which belongs, according to the late Mr. E. B. Steedman,
to that miscellaneous body of men who call themselves Rájputs, hold a
.. large portion of the south-eastern corner of the Ráwalpindi district, and
are of much the same class as the Budhál and Bhakrál. They also
appear to stretch along the sub-montane as far east as Gujrat.
KÁNITA, see Kaith.
KANJAN, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultaral) found in Montgomery.
KANJAN, a Ját clan (agricultural) well-known in Lodhrán tahsil, Multan
district, see under Channar and Nún.
KANJAR.-(1) The Kanjar of the Delhi territory, or 88 he seems to be
called in the Ambála division the JALLÁD, is a wandering tribe very
similar to the Perna; and in that part of the country a pimp or
prostitute is called KANCEAN or by some similar name, and never
Kanjar. In the remainder of the Punjab the word Ranchan is not.
used, the wandering tribe of Kanjars is apparently not found, and
Kanjar is the ordinary word for pimp or prostitute, Thus Kanchan and
Kadjar (including Jallad) are separately returned in the eastern districts.
but only Kanjar for the rest of the Province. The Kancbans are
almost all Musalmáns, while the Kadjars are all Hindus, except in Sirsa;



Kánjú-Kápri.
475
and probabiy the Musalmán Kanjars in Sirsa are really Kanchans.
The Kanjars of the Delhi territory are a vagrant tribe who wander
about the country catching and eating jackals, lizards, and the like,
makiog rope and other articles of grass for sale, and curing boils and
other diseases. They particularly make the grass brushes used by
weavers. They are said to divide their girls into two classes; one
they marry themselves, and them they do not prostitute; the other
they keep for purposes of prostitution. The Kanjars appear to be
of higher status thau the Nat, though ihey are necessarily outcasts.
They worship Máta, whom they also call Káli Mái; but whether they
refer to Káli Devi or to Sitla does not appear, most probably to the
former. They also reverence Gúga Pír. Delhi is said to be the
headqaarters of the tribe. But the word Kanjar seems to be used in
a very loose manner; and it is not certain that these Kanjars are not
merely a Bauria tribe; and it is just possible that they have received
their name from their habit of prostituting their daughters, from the
Panjábi word Kanjar. The words Kanjar and Bangáli also seem
often to be used as synonymous. Further, to quote Mr. H. L. Williams,
Sánsis in Hindustan and the Districts of the Punjab east of the
Ghaggar river are known as Kanjars, but the relations between the
Sánsis of the Panjab and the Kanjars of Hindustan are not always
clear. There are permanent Kanjar colonies in several important
cantonments, the men being mostly employed in menial offices in
the barracks while the women attend the females of other castes
in domestic duties, as cuppers and sick-nurses ; they also sell embroca-
tions and curative oils. The menbers of tbese colonies intermarry on
equal terms with the wandering Kanjars of the Delhi division,
journeying down country for the purpose. They admit a relationship
between the Sánsis and the Kanjars of the south, and that they
speak a common dialect, which may be a thieves' patter or a patois
of their original home. Wandering Sánsis style themselves Kanjars
only in the Delhi territory and parts of the east, dropping the name
when they approach the Sutlej. (2) A Ját clan (agricultural) found
in Multán.
KÁNJú, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
Kanon, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KANONKHOB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Kapsári, see Sayyid.
KAŅwarf, a Ját clan (agricultaral) found in Multán.
KÁŅWIN, a Já¢ clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Kapání, (of the colour of the cotton-plant lower), a section of the Khattrís.
Kapáí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Kápri, a caste which claims Brahman origin and makes the mor and other
ornaments worn by the bridegroom at weddings, artificial Aowers
and similar articles of talc, tinsel and the like. (These would appear
to be by caste Phúl MÁLIS). They also appear to be connected, at
least in Delhi, with the Jain temples where they officiate as priests.
between the Sans dialect, whichering Sansis stylet, dropping the found



476
Kápria-Karláni.
and receive offerings.* They also act in Gargaon as Bbáts at wed-
dings in singing the praises of the pair. They are said to come
from Rájpotána or the Bágar, where they are koowo as Hindu Dúms.
The following account appears to confuse them with the Rhappari :
In Rohtak the Kápri are a Brahman cian, which is divided into two
classes, tápashi and kápri. The story goes that when Mahádeo was
going to be married, he asked a Brahman to join the procession and
ceremony. He refused saying, 'what can I do if I go ? 'Mahadeo then
gave him two dhatura flowers and told him to blow them as he
went along with the procession. He said, how can I blow two
flowers ?' He then told him to pick up a corpse (káyá) lying (pari) on
the ground, but it at once rose up and took the other flower. The
progeny of the Brahwan were henceforward called tapshi (worshippers)
and the offspring of the corpse kápri (káyápari).
In Nábha they make cups (dunna) of leaves and also pattals or
platters of them. In Ambála they are said to print cloth.
KÁPRIA, KÁPARI, a sect which covers the whole body, even the face, with
clothes. Macauliffe's Sikh Religion, I, p. 280; VI, 217.
KAPÚR (camphor, fr. Arabic káfúr), a section of the Khattrís.
BARÁĘ, see KIRÁR.
KARAUNKA, KARAWAK, see KIRAUNK.
KARELA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KARHÁLA8, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KARKHÍAD, a sect or order of the Súfis, founded by Khwaja Márúf Karkhi.
KARLÁNI, one of the principal branches of the Pathans, whose descent is
thus given :-
Yahtida (Judah).
Bani Makhzúm.
Walid.
Khalid.
Qais.i.Abd-ur-Rashíd, the Patán.
Safaban.
Sharf.ud-Din alias Sharkhabún.
Amar-ud-Din or Amár.Din. Miána.
Urmur.
Two men of Urmur's family, Abdulla and Zakaría, were once out
bunting, and Zakaria, who had a large family and was poor, found &
male child abandoned on an encamping ground, where Abdulla who
was wealthy and childless found a shallow iron cooking vessel (karáhai
or karhai). The brothers agreed to exchange their foods, and Abdulla
adopted the foundling whom he named Karlánai. Another account
* These are probably the Kápria or Kápari, 9. v.



477
Kárlúgh-Karrál.
makes Karlánai a Saraban by descent and the adopted son of Amar.
ud-Dín; wbile Muhammad Afzal Khán, the Khattak historian, makes
Karlánai a brother of Amai and Urmur, and relates how the latter
found Kapláni, who had been left behind when the camp was
hurriedly struck, and placed him in a karhai. Amai accepted the
karhai in exchange for him, and be was then adopted by Urmur who
gave him a girl of his family to wife. On the other hand, the
Dilazáks give Karlánai à Sayyid descent.
By bis Urmuş wife Karlánai had issue :
Karlánai.
Kodai.
Kakai.
Utman. Dilazák. Warak. Manai. Luqmán alias Khogai. Mangalai.
Khatak.
Jadrán,
Sulaimán.
Sharaf-ud-din alias Shitak,
2. IT
Wazir. Bai. Malik Mír. Giwai. Ado. Dawar. Malakhai. Surránai.
Khushbál Kháp, however, gives a different table. He makes Burhán,
progenitor of the Dilazáks, and Warak, sons of Kodai; but he gives
Kbatak, Utmán, Usman and Jadrán as descendants of Kodai.
Further, Sayyid Muhammad, a pious darwesh, espoused a daughter
of the Kaplanai family and had by her two sons, Honai and Wardag.
The Kaplánis, generally, were disciples of the Pir-i-Rosháp, and
those of Bangash (the modern Kurram) were peculiarly devoted
Roshánias, but they were regarded as heretics by both Shias and
Sunnís. Their tenets brouzht great disasters upon the Kaplánis as the
Mughals made frequent expeditions against the tribes addicted to the
Roshánía heresy.
KÁRLúgy, Kárlúk, see QÁRLÚQH.
KARNATAK, a got of the Oswal Bhábras, found in Hoshiarpur.
KARNAUL, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
KARNIRE, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
KAROL, see Qarol.
Karóla, a Muhammadan clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Karról, a tribe found only in Hazára. According to the late Colonel R. G.
Wace“ the Karrál country consists of the Nára ilága in Abbottábád
tahsil. The Karráls were formerly the subjects of the Gakkhars, from
whom they emancipated themselves some two centuries ago. Originally
Hindus, their conversion to Islám is of comparatively modern date,
Thirty years ago their acquaintance with the Muhammadan faith wag



478
Kartárs Kashmiri.
me identical infty and cowardino industr
world up to horns and various when
still slight; and though they now know more of it, and are more careful
to observe it, relics of their former Hindu faith are still observable in
their social habits. They are attached to their homes and their fields
which they cultivate simply and industriously. For the rest, their
character is crafty and cowardly." He further noted that the Karráls
are identical in origin and character with the Dhúnds. This would
make the Karráls one of the Rájput tribes of the hills lying along the
left bank of the Jhelum; and they are said to claim Rájput origin, though
they have also recently set up a claim to Kayani Mughal descent,
in common with the Gakkhars; or, as a variety, that their ancestor
came from Kayán, but was a descendant of Alexander the Great! But
the strangest story of all is that a queen of the great Rája Rasálu of
Punjab folklore had by a paramour of the scavenger class four sons,
Seo, Teo, Gheo, and Karu, from whom are respectively descended the
Sials, Tiwánas, Ghebas, and Karráls. They intermarry with Gakkhars,
Sayyids and Dhúnds.
KARTÁRI, KALTÁRí, a Hindu sect which has sprung up in the south-west of
the Punjab of late years. Its founder was one Assa, an Aroſa of
Bhakkar, in Dera Ismail Khan, who made disciples not only from among
the Hindus, but also from among the Musalmán cultivators of that
District. The followers of this Pír usually go through the ordinary
business of the world up to noon, after which they will paint their faces
with tilaks of wonderful patterns and various colours, and will either sit
in the bazar without uttering a word, even when spoken to, or will
wander about with fans in their hands. They are indifferent to the
holy books of either creed. Their behaviour is harmless and the sect
does not appear to be progressing.
KARÚŅJARÁ, fem. -í, a seller of vegetables, i. q. Kunjrá.
Kasáí, fem. -IN, (fr. Arab. QABÁB, a butoher).
KASÁnye, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KÁsbi, a synonym for Juláhá in Hazára.
KASERA, a brazier, a worker in pewter or brass. See ȚAȚHERA.
KASHMÍRI.--The word Kashmiri is perhaps applicable to the menubers of any
of the races of Kashmír; but it is commonly used in Kashmir itself to
denote the people of the valley of Srinagar. In any case the term is a
geographical one, and probably includes many of what we should in the
Punjab call separate castes. The cultivating class who form the great
mass of the Kashmiris proper are probably of Aryan descent, though
perhaps with an intermixture of Khas blood, and possess marked cha-
racters. Drew describes them as “large made and robust and of a
really fine cast of feature," and ranks them as “the finest race in
the whole continent of India.” But their history is, at any rate in re-
cent times, one of the most grievous suffering and oppression; and
they are cowards, liars, and withal quarrelsome, though at the same
tiine keen-witted, cheerful, and humorous. A good acconnt of them
will be found in Drew's Jummoo and Kashmir.
In the Punjab the term Kashmíri connotes a Muhammadan Kashmíri.
It is rarely, if ever, applied to a Hindo of Kashmír. The most ins
Intermit them ad tankheir history and oth at the of
of India..and ranks themade and ob marked chinh



Kashmiri titlos.
479
portant Kashmiri element in the Punjab is found in the cities of Ludhiana
and Amritsar, which still contain large colonies of weavers, employed
in weaving carpets and finer fabrics. Besides these, many Kashmiris
are found scattered all over these Provinces, many being descended from
those who were driven from Kashmír by the great famine of 1878 into
the sub-montane districts of the Punjab. Many of the Kashmiris in
Gujrát, Jhelum and Attock are, strictly speaking, Chibhális. A full
account of the Kashmir krams and tribes will be found in Sir Walter
Lawrence's Valley of Kashmir, Ch. XII. The principal tribes returned
in the Punjab are the Bat, Batti, Dár, Lún, Mahr, Mán, Mír, Sbaikh,
Wáin and Warde. Jú is also common and like Bat and other tribe-
names is now practically a surname. A Khokhar tribe--who do not
intermarry at below 20 years of age-is also found in Ferozepur.
Watorfield noted the following castes and titles or occupations among
the Kashmíris in Gujrát :-
Casto or desig.
nation.
Corresponding to
No.
Caste or desig
pation.
Corresponding to
1 But (Bat)
Pandits and Brabman | 14 Mochi ...
proselytes.
...
Mochi,
2
Beg
...
.
15 Pandit ...
...
Proselytized Aroſas or
Khatris,
3 Busbainde
... High casto.
16
Pallú
...
...
Ajar. Abír.
... Low-class zamindárs. || 17
Pálik
...
Dák-runner.
Paidja.
18 Pándi ...
A porter.
Atár Pansári.
... Ol high rank.
7 | Kanáo ...
..
Average zumindárs.
20 Ráthur
Zamindárs
degree.
of
good
8 | Khán ...
...
.. Majáwar, Pírzáda.
Those who may be con-| 21 Raishu .....
nected by marriage
with Patháns.
Kúmbár.
22 Sháh ...
9 Karrár ...
..
...
Sayyid-Fakir.
10
Kotu
...
... Paper.maker.
23 Súfz
...
...
Darzi.
11 Lavinah
... Dharwii.
84 Aram
...
... Rain.
...
12 Mallás...
Manjhi.
85
Vair
...
...
Khoja, Bannia
13 Malik ...
... Rajpat.



480
Kasrána-Kassar.
dary be beyond divided into
Kaskána, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KASRÁNI, Qaisarani, is the northernmost of the Balocs organised tumans,
its territory lying on either side of the boundary between the two Deras,
and being confined to the hills both within and beyond our frontier
and the sub-montane strip. The tribe is a poor one, and is divided into
seven clans, the Lashkaráni, Rúbadan, Ř bepdín, Budáni, Wasuáni,
Leghári, Jarwar and Badá, none of which are important. They are of
Rind origin, and are not found in the Punjab in any numbers beyond
the Dera Ghazi and Dera Ismail Khán districts.
KASSAR.—The Kassars hold the girater part of the north-west quarter of the
Chakwal tahsil in Jhelum, and as far as is known are not found in any
numbers in any other part of the Province : Ibbetson (Census Report,
$ 508) remarks that unti) 1881 they seem to have enjoyed the rare dis.
tinction of being one of the few Salt Range tribes which claimed neither
Rájput, Awán, nor Mugbal descent, but according to Bowring they
once claimed Rajput origin* asserting that their original home was in
Jammu; and that they obtained their preseut territories by joining the
armies of Bábar; most of them, however, recorded themselves as Mughals
at the Census of 1881, a claim "evidently suggested by their association
with the Mughal power”: this claim has now developed into a genea-
logical tree in which the Kassars are shown as being of common origin
with the Mughal emperors. Their present account of their origin is as
follows:
“They were origically located in the country of Kinán in Asia Minor, whence thoy
migrated to Ghazai at some time upknowu with the ancestors of the Mugbal dynasty,
and subsequently accompanied Bábar in his lovasion of India in a. D. 1526, their ances.
tors at that time being Gbarka and Bhin (or Bhol), according to some; or Jajha, Láti and
Kaulshi according to others: all agree, bowever, in stating that Gharka is baried on a
mound in Mouza Határ, vot many miles from Dbok Pipli in Bal Kassar, which is said to
bo the original settlement of the tribe in these parts. The Dhapni was then in tbe hands
of wandering Gajars, while Changas Kbán Japjvá held the bills to the south, liviog at
Fort Samarqand near Mauza Máira. Bábar made over to them the western part of the
Dhanni, ou condition that they would drain off the water with which the eastern part
was then covered, a work which they proceeded to carry out: and Gharka obtained some
additional country to the south-west as a reward for restoring to Changas Khán a
favourite mare, which the Japjuá Rája bad lost. They claim that the vume, Baluki Dan,
under which the tract figures in the Ain-i. Akbari, is derived from that of their ancestor
Bhal, who also gave bie name to the important village of Bal Kassar; and in tbis they
are supported by the spelling of the lithographed editiou of the Aín-i. Akbari, against the
assertion of the Japjúas, that the vame is Maluki Dhan, from the Janjúa chief, Mal of
Malot, They explain the presence now of the Máirs and Kabúts in the Dhanni by stating
that, as relations of the reigning dyuasty thuy were themselves able to keep out all intru.
ders in the time of the Mughals; but in Sikh rule tbe Máirs, being of tbe gaine stock as
the powerful Jamma Rája, were able to obtaiu a footing in the tract: they generally
admit that the Kabúts cane with them in Bábar's train and settled bere at the saino
time as themselves, but gay that they were of small account until the time of the
Sikhs. They state that the original profession of the tribe was 'hákúmat' or govern
mont; and that it is tiow agriculture or Goverument employment. They use the title
of chaudhri, They bare no special Pírs or places of worybip, and their customs do not
differ in any respect from those of the tribes surrounding them, except that the graves of
women are distivguished by stone at the bead and foot parallel to the breadth of the
grave, while those of ineu's graves are parallel to the length; this is just the opposite of
the costom in the Jhelum Pabbi."
Whatever may be thought of the claim of the Kassars to rank as
Mughals, they certainly have a good position amongst the tribes of the
District, ranking in popular estimation with the Máire and Kahúts, they
*J. A. 8. B., 1850, pp. 43-64 (the Kábuts also claimed Kájput descent),



Kat-Katbál.
481
intermarry freely with the former, both giving and taking daughters :
but a Kassar of good family who married his daughter to a Kahút of
fair standing incurred the displeasure of the brotherhood : they do not
intermarry with any other tribe, though as is usually the case in the
Jhelum district low caste wives are occasionally taken by them. Máirs,
Kassars and Kahuts eat together, but not with kamins.
The doggerel rhymes of the tribal Mirásís contain little of interest,
either setting forth in extravagant terms the power of individual chiefs
of bygone generations, or recording the incidents of the comparatively
recent internecine feuds of the tribe : the following is well known, and
another version is given by the Máirs also :-
Charhiá Bábar Badshah ; Kahár tambú tanáe :
Bhin te Gharká Kassar doen nál áe.
“ Bábar Bádsháh marched, and pitched his tent at (Kalla) Kabár :
Bhín and Gharká, the Kassars, both came."
An abbreviated tree of the tribe is given below:-
Abchal Noian.
7 generations.
Kassar.
5 generations.
8 generations.
Babar.
Gharka.
Khol (or Bhín).
4 generations.
Bhin.
Ghanni.
Bhadar.
Bal
Bal.
Kaul Shính. Látí. Jhajhá.
The earlier part of the tree connecting the tribe with Bábar is obvi.
ously fancifal, and the latter part not altogether reliable. Such names
as Tilochar, Nand, Pres, etc., are mixed up with Muhammadan names
in the former part, while a Jhan Deo occurs low down in the tree: these
names may iodicate a Hindu origin, though the tradition of the tribe is
that they were Musalmáns long before they came to these parts. About
35 generations on the average intervene between Kassar and members
of the tribes now living. In character they resemble the Máirs.
KAT, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán. .
KATALBÁSBI, see Qizzilbásh.
KAȚÁRYE, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KAȚÁL, a sept of Rajputs found in the Simla Hills. To it belong the chiefs
of Jubbal, Ráwín, Sairi and Tarhoch. The Khaus or Kbash sept of the
Kapets is also called Kaţál.
KATÁRIA, a small Ját clan, found in Bawal; it derives its name from katár,
& dagger.
KATAYA, a fine wire.drawer : see under Tärkash.
RATBÁL, a Baloch clan said to be found in the Derajat, as well as in Multan
and Lahore. But cf. Katpál.



482
Rathâno-Káthia.
KAȚHÁNE, % Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KATHÁNYE, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KATHAR, KAHTAR, see Khattar.
KÁTHIA.-One of the Great Rávi tribes, and next in importance amoug them
to the Kharra). The Káthias claim to be Punwár Rájputs, and are
almost confined to the Rávi valley of the Multán aod Montgomery
Districts, but they hold a considerable area in the south of Jhang, which
they are said to have acquired from the Kamlána Siáls in retjirn for aid
afforded to the latter against the Nawab of Multán. The Káthias once
practised female infanticide. Previously they had lived on the Ravi
and in the lower part of the Sándal Bár. They were supposed to be the
same people as the Kathæi, who in their stronghold of Sángla so stout-
ly resisted the victorious army of Alexander. The question was elabo.
rately discussed by Sir Alexander Cunningham at pp. 33 to 42 of Vol. II
of his Archæological Reports, and in Vol. I, p. 101ff of Tod's Rájasthan
(Madras Reprint, 1880). Captain Elphinstone thus described them in
bis Montgomery Settlement. Report :-
“The remarkable fact that a people called 'Kathaioi' occupied a part of the Gugaira
district when Alexander invaded the Punjab, invests the Kathia tribe with a poculiar
interest. After much enquiry on the subject, I have come to the conclusion that the
Káthias of the present day have a strong claim to be considered the descendants of
the same · Kathaioi' who so gallantly resisted the Macedonian conqueror. Their own
account of their origin is, of course, far different. Like all Játs they take a particular
pride in tracing their descent from a Rajput prince about the time of their conversion to
Muhammadanism under the Emperor Akbar. "But au examination of their alleged pedigree
shows that, like many other popular traditions of this kind, this account of their origin
must be altogether fictitious. They state that a prince named 'Khattya,' reigaing in
Rajputána, was compelled to yield up one of his sisters in marriage to the emperor of
Delbi. After brooding for some time over this great outrage to Rajput honour, he contrived
to assemble a large army with which he attacked the imperial forces : he was, however,
overcome by superior numbers, and was made a prisoner after nearly all his adhérents had
been slain. He was then conducted with great honour to the Court of Delhi, where the
emperor treated him with kindness, and at last induced him to embrace the Muhammadan
faith, and placed under his charge an important post near the Court. Some time afterwards
he was sent with a force to subdue a portion of the Rávi tribes who had risen in insur.
rection, and after conquering them was so much attracted by the beauty of the country,
that he remained and received a grant of the whole tract for himself and his descendants.
All the Káthias claim descent from this pripce, but, unfortunately for the credibility of this
story, the only way that his 8,000 descendants manage to arrange the matter is by assuming
that the prince had no less than 150 sons; whilst in a pedigree prepared by the chief
Mirási of the tribe, in which the increase of offspring in the different generations is arranged
with more accordance to probability, the line is only brought down to a few of the principal
families of the tribe.
"In their habits the Kathias differ little from the other Ját tribes. Before the accession
of Ranjit Singh they lived chiefly on cattle grazing and plunder. Like the Kharrals and
Fattiá nas they still keep up Hindu parohits, who take a prominent part at all marriage
festivities, an undoubted sign of their conversion to Muhammadanism having been of recent
date. They are n handsome and sturdy race, and like nearly all Játs of the Great Rávi'
do not allow their children of either sex to marry until they have attained the age of
puberty, because, as they justly consider, too early marriages would be detrimental to the
physique of the race. Their chief and favourite article of food is buttermilk; the
consumption of wheat among them is very inconsiderable."
Mr. Purser, however, gave a somewhat different account of their
migrations. He said :-
" The Káthias have been identified with the Kathaioi' of Alexander's time. According
to their account they are descended from Rája Karan, Súrajbansi, Originally they resided
in Bikáner, whonce they emigrated and founded the State of Kathiáwár. From there they
wont to Sirsa and then to Bahawalpur. Next they crossed over to Kabula and went on to



Kathura-Kátil.
488
felis atair, boné co obtained the telelawal *
Daira Dínpanáh. Horo they quarrelled with the Balochis and had to leave. They thon
settled at Mírah Siál in Jhang. They stole the cattle of Aláwal Khán of Kamália, who was
killed pursuing thom. Saadat Yár Khán obtained the release of their leaders (who woro
imprisoned on account of this affair) on condition of their settling on the Rávi. Thus the
Kathias obtained a footing in this District. They always held by the Kamália Kharrals,
but plundered the others whenever they could get a chance. The Káthias are Punwar
Rájputs. There are two main divisions; the Káthias proper and the Baghelas."*
This would make the Kathias of the Rávi immigrants from Kathiawár.
But a Pandit of Guzerát who was sent into the Punjab by the Raja of
Jazdán, one of the principal Káthia wár States, to make enquiries on the
subject, found that the Káthiawár Rájputs, who also claim descent from
Rája Kuran, have a tradition that they came to their present territory
from the Papjab viâ Sindh and Kach. The Kathia tradition is that
they were driven out of Sirsa Ránia, or the valley of the lower Ghaggar,
about the time of Tamerlane's invasion. Balwána and Pawar are two
leading clans.
In recent times the tribe has in Jhang been going from bad to worse,
and it is now of little importance in that District.
KATHURA, an A ráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Kátil, a Rájput clan found in Gurdáspur. Their founder Rája Karet,
driven from the plains in the time of Mahmúd of Ghazni, settled :
in Mangla Devi, a fort in Jammu and thence raised Kharipur,
whence his descendants became known as Khokbars. They still
hold large estates in Jammu. One of them took to robbery in the
forest round Sambha,+ and thence seized a Sambial girl, so her
kinsmen gave him a large tract of land in Shakargarh tahsil. In this
he founded Katli and his descendants were called Kátils. The tribe
founded 360 villages, of which there remain only 100, 60 in British
territory and 40 in Jammu. The Kátils claim to be Surajbansi, and
descended from Báwá Sáhi, regarding the Mahájans, Kuprás, Aswárs
(horse-tamers), Chamárs, Batwals and Dumnás dos branches or off-
shoots of the tribe, whose observances those castes follow.
In Aurangzeb's time the Kátils, Rao, Balel, Mal and Nihála became
Muhammadans, but remained Kátils by caste.
The Kátils do not intermarry with the bigher Rájput septs, such as
the Sambiál, but they intermarry with a number of the Rajput septs of
Jammu, as well as with the Lalotari and Deowania, and the Thakkar
septs. Intermarriage with the Khokhars is prohibited because they
are regarded us akin to the Kátil by descent.
This is based on the following tradition :-Brahma, who was de-
sconded from Suraj (sun), Mirichak, Kásyab after whom oor got (sub-
caste) is named, Taran, Karao, Sompat, Brihaspat, Avagyádhátá,
Dayadhátá, Mahándhátá, Beaspál, Ratanpál, Atter, Rájá Sahasranar,
Santan Rája, Karet Rájá, Kood Rájá, Rájá Cbit, Rájá Gora, Bharath;
Rájá Sántal, Rájá Bál and Rájá Jasrath took possession of the fort of
Mangla Devi in the Khari territory and settled there. His descendants
thos became known as Khokhars, and still hold lands in the Jammu
State though they have become Muhammadads.'
* The Baghelas are confined to the neighbourhood of Kamália and were probably only
retainers of the Kathia originally.
† The then capital of Jammu.



484
The Katoch.
Kelan who was descondod from Bani, Sugga, and Sai settlod at
Katli in Jammu and his descendants became known as Kátals.
Pajan, Khang, Gega, Dherú and Ládá were the incostors of Bhúra
who founded the village Bháre Chak aod named it after himself. Ladha,
the son of Kundan and grandson of Bánon had two sons :-Nihálá
and Surjan. Nibálá founded Nihálá Chak. Rughal was the son of
Surjan.
Dharewa, also called udhálá, is practised by the Kátils,* even Brahman
widows being espoused under this system. But the offspring of such
unions are looked down upon and find it difficult to obtain wives,
though they succeed equally with the children of full legitimacy,
Dharewa is most usually contracted with a man of the husband's family
and, provided the second husband declares that the widow is his wifo
before all the brotherhood, no rite is necessary or customary. But if
she marry outside her husband's family she loses the custody of his
children, and she forfeits her right to succeed to his property if she re-
marry.
The Brahmans of the Kátils must be of the Manútara or Sársut
branch, and of the Kásyapa gotra, as they themselves are,
In the government of the tribe a learned Brahman is associated with
a leading man of good position and influence, who is elected from time
to time, not for life but for an indefinite period. He alone, or in
consultation with 3 or 4 members of the brotherhood, decides all
disputes. Many disputes are decided by oaths--a deponent being
made to bathe and touch a pípal, a temple or an idol, or to hold his
son in his arms, and then swear. Boundary disputes are settled by
one of the parties placing a clod of earth on his head and walking along
what he declares to be the true boundary. This is a very solemn oath
as if sworn falsely the earth will refuse to receive him.
The only tribal cult of the Kátils appears to be that of their satist
whose tombs still exist at Katli, to which place pilgrimages are made
twice a year. But the Kátils have various other cults in common with
other Rájput tribes on the Jammu border. Such are Káli Bir, Vaishno
Devi, Báwá Sárgal, a snake god, B. Sadda Garia besides the better-
known Lakhdatta, Narsinghji, Bhairon Náth and others.
KATOCH. The generic name of the dynasty whose original capital was at
Jullundur but whose territories were subsequently restricted to the
Kángra hills. The kingdom whose capital was at Jullundur (Jálandhara)
was called T'rigarta, but the name of its dynasty does not appear to
be recorded, and the name Katoch is confined to the house of Kángļa.
From it sprang four or five branches, the Jaswals or rulers of the
Jaswán Dún in Hoshiarpur, the Goleria, once rulers of Goler or
Haripur in Kángļa, the Sibáia or Sipáia of Síba in Kangſa and
the Dadwals of Datárpor on the borders of Kangſa in Hoshiarpur.
A fifth branch which claims Katoch descent is the LUDDU Rajput
. Or rather in some families : those of position disallowing the practice.
* Twice a year murandas (sweets) and til.cháwali (sesame and rice) are ofered to the
satiavuti. Theso offerings are taken by the Manútari Brahmans.



Kator-Raum.
485
sopt. The Katoch are by status Jaikaria Rájputs of the 1st grade.
The Goloria represent the elder line and from it sprang the Siba and
Dadwal, the Jaswál being an offshoot of the main branch.
KATOR, a race mentioned by several Muhammadan historians of India.
Baihaki in his Táríkh-i-Sabaktigin mentions that all the Hindu
Kators were brought under the rule of the Sultán Mas'ud, but he
does not specify their locality.* A bú Rihan at Bírúni speaks of
Katormán as the last of the Turk kings of Kábul,t but the dynasty
appears to have been also called Katormán, Katorián or Kayormán. I
Elliot gives a full account of them, but it is doubtful if the dynasty
was generally called Kaţormán. $ Taimúr bowevor unquestionably
found the Kators in allianca with the Siáh posh and holding a kingdom
which extended from the frontier of Kashmír to the mountains of
Kábul and contained many towns and villages. Their roler was called
'Adálshu, Udá or Udáshu (which recalls Udáyana or Swát) and had
his capital at Jorkal. He describes the Kators as men of a powerful
frame and fair complexion, idolaters for the most part, and speaking
a tongue distinct from Turki, Persian, Sindi or Kashmíri.ll Taimur
attacked their strongholds, reaching, according to Raverty, that part of
Kafiristán known as Kashțúr while the prince Rustam advanced into
thuse parts where the Káțibi, Siáhposh, Pándu and Sáláo now dwell. I
This was in 1398 A.D., and in the end of the 15th century Sultán
Mahmúd, a descendant of Taimúr led expeditions agaiost the Kator
Kafirs and Siahposh and thereby earned the title of Gházi. Raverty
identifies the Kator with the Spín or White Káfirs,** but the historians
of Akbar, who sent an expedition under Jabangir in 1581 against the
Siahposh Kafirs of the mountains of Kator, and Abu'l Fazl in his
history of Taimúr's expedition speak of the Hindúán-i-Kator, a
country which they describe as bounding Buner, Swát and Bajaur
on the north. The family of the Mihtar of Chitral is still called Kåtor
(vide p. 174 supra), and Biddulph's proposed identification of the
Kathar or KHATTAR of Attock cannot be regarded as proved.*
KATOR(E), a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Karpal, said to be a synonym for or a'subgroup of the Pakhiwâra. Cf. also
Katbál.
Katran, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KATTBAK, a story-teller, a rehearser of the Shástras: a singer, a dancing
boy, fr. kath, kathá, a story, fable.
Katwát, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
RAom, a small tribe found near Mitru in Multán which is said to have come
from Central Asia.
* E, H, I., 1. p. 128.
† Ibid. p. 403.
Ibid. pp. 405.6.
$ Ibid. pp. 407.8.
|| Ibid. pp. 400.1. Of. pp. 480-1.
| Notes on Afghánistán, p. 136.
** Ibid., p. 135,
tt It is abandoned by Irvine : J, R. A. 8., 1911, pp.1217-8



406
Kaura-Kohal.
Kaurá, an agricultural clan found in Shábpur: also in Montgomery where it
is recognised as a Kharral clan.
Kaurí, a Muhammadan Ját olan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Kauriána, a sept of the Siáls.
Kawárí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KAWERA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Kayáni, see under Gakkhar.
Kávati, see Kaith.
Kází, see Qází.
Kazeúnían, one of the sects or orders of the Súfis: founded by Abu Ishaq
Kazrúní, whose shrine is at Sbiráz.
KEHAL.--A nomad tribe of fishermen and boatmen, who ply their boats
between Kálábágh and Sakkar on the Indus, rarely if ever quitting the
vallev of that river. But Mallahs, described as Jhabel by caste and
Kehal by got are found in Ludhiána, and doubtless elsewhere.
The Kehala claim to be the earliest converts to Islám between Kálábágb
and Karachi, but profess to follow Imám Shafi, and eat unelean animals
and fish found in the Indus in spite of the Qurán.
Thas their favourite food is the flesh of the sisár or long.nosed fish.
eating crocodile, but they avoid that of the bagú or snub-nosed crocodile.
Centuries ago the Kehals had a saint, one Cháchá Mithá, of their own
tribe, but nothing is known of his life or history.
Like the Mohánas and Jhabels the Kehals invoke “ Dam Dín-panáh,"
Dum Baháwal Haqq, Lál Isá and Ailí Rajin or simply Aili.*
The Kehals are said to have no belief in devils, but the Mobánas and
Jhabels hold that any disease is due to demoniacal possession and that
tbese demons of disease belong to certain saints of the neighbouring
tracts, such as Lál Isá of Karor, Ailí Rájin, Dínpanáh, Jamman Shah,
etc. These demons have human names such as Gorá Khetrípál, Zulf
Jamal, Nur Jamal, Nur Muhammad, Chingú, Ghulam Rasál, Kundai,
Shabrátin, etc., etc., and of these the last two are female jinns. Women
are most commonly possessed and they promptly inform their relatives
of the jinn's name, and which saint he or she belongs to. Children of
both sexes have to swim when 5 years of age and ore expert in swim-
ming and diving by the time they are 10.
Fishing is practised at any time of the day or night, but avoided on
Fridays, and forbidden on the day when a wedding is being celebrated
Alligators are caught in the following way: a back-water or pool which
forms a branch of the main stream is chosen and a heavy net, in which
is a large opening, is placed across its mouth. A putrescent carcase
or fish bones are placed in the pool as bait, and four Kehals lie in
ambush on the bank. When the alligator is seen inside the pool two
* Ali, whose name is pronouncod Ailí by doda.players also.
of Al.
Of. Yaili, the Balochi form



Kehal customs.
487
of the hunters rush to close the hole in the net, while the other two
drive the animal into it, or harass it until it is tired ont, when it is
speared and killed. Occasionally a man is bitten but fatal bites are
very rare. Tortoises are killed in a similar way. Sometimes in shallow
pools nets are unnecessary, and in the cold season when alligators,
tortoises and large fish lie concealed in the mud at the bottom of the
shallow streams and back-waters the Kehals prod it with their spears
and kill the animals before they can escape. Fish are sometimes caught
by stirring up the mud until they float half-dead on the surface.
Kehals ply their boats for hire, sell baskets and mats, reap crops for
hire and beg for grain. They do not sell fish in the bazars of a town.
Birth customs.-A first-born child, if a boy, is peculiarly auspicious,
and if & daughter, unlucky. It is very unlucky to have three clangbters,
and still worse to have a son after three girls, as he never fails to cause
his mother's or father's death within 3 years. Great rejcicings are
held for a first-born son, mulláhs, Sayyids, eunuchs and their followers
being feasted. On the 3rd day a boy is named, and on the 7th his head
is shaved. A girl's head is merely shaved on the 7th day, and her ears
pierced in 10 or 15 places before she is 5. Kehal women do not pierce
the nostril for the nose-ring. A boy is circumcised before he is io by
a pirahin, precisely as he is among the Baloch. He is made to put on
a gáná or string of red cotton thread round his right wrist, a piece of
cotton cloth 11 yards long by j wide, as a tahmat, and a second piece
about 3 yards long for a pagri, but his kurta should be white. If a
mosqne is handy, he is taken to it, followed by drummers who dance
and sing. A new earthen parát or jar is placed on the ground at the
gate and on it the boy is seated with his feet on the ground. A man
holds his hands back while the pirahin operates.
Marriage.--Muhammadan rites are observed at weddings, but one or
two points deserve notice. The boats, etc., are swept and all bones and
refuse removed to make them fit to receive strangers. The bride is
dressed in red (chúní, cholí and ghaghará): the bridegroom in white
(pagri, kurta and tahmat). The day before the nikah drummers and an
eunuch are called in to dance and sing. Muhammadan friends also
come with their own cooking vessels and kill two or more goats or
sheep. On tbese thèy feast, giving a share to the Kehals, but no
Kehal may approach while the animals are being killed, cooked or eaten.
After mid-day they all play, dance and sing together, going home in the
evening. Next day all re-assemble at the same place, the nikáh is read,
the strangers withdraw, after congratulating the bridegroom and his
parents. The bride and bridegroom are then shut up together in a hut
of reeds for an hour or two to consummate the marriage, and the
ceremonies close. The cost of the wedding falls on the boy's father, but
the bride's dress, ornaments, if any, and the household chattels are
provided by her father.
Unlike other Muhammadans a married Kehal goes to live permanenia
ly with his father-in-law and subsequently becomes his heir. If he is a
minor at the time of his wedding he continues to live in his father's
house till of age. A newly married wife waits 6 months and if not
pregnant by then she gets herself circumcised, whereon pregnancy usu.
ally ensues.



488
Kejah-Ketwál.
Succession.-Daughters and sons share equally in their father's pro-
perty, and disputes regarding succession are said to be decided by the
mulláhs according to Muhammadan Law.
The Kehals are divided into three groups, Loria, Daphala and Morá ;
of which the first is the chief. It is said to derive its name from the
mulláh, a Lori of Lurístán, who first taught them Islám. T'he Daphala
are so called because they have large mouths,* and the Morá because
they have dark complexions.
Closely akin to the Kehals, or at least allied to them by occupation
and habits, are the Jhabelst and Mohánas. The latter are said to be
More-háná or “allied to the Mora” branch of the Kehals and they have
two divisions, the Kutpál and the Roſa. Kutpál is said to mean “ feeder
(pál) of a large city or army” (kut), because centuries ago a large
force of a king of Muitán who had met with defeat was marching west-
wards to cross the Indus and the Kutpáls supplied it with fish, in return
for which its leader taught them to avoid eating unclean animals and
made them perfect Moslems. But it is also said that many Kehals bave
become Mohánas, Jhabels or Mancheras, since the introduction of
Islám, and taken to cultivation. In former times these tribes were wont
to combine against a common enemy.
KEJAì, a Ját clan (agriculturel) found in Multán.
KEJAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KELE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. .
KERAD, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
Kes, a Muhammadan tribe, apparently Ját, found in Montgomery.
KESAR-SHÁRI.- On the death of Faqir Seyyid Mír Sháh, also styled Mían
Mír (from whom the Cantonment of Lahore took its former pame),
Sarvid Bhawan Shah of Nurpur Chaumak in Jammu succeeded him as
facir, and conferred that same title upon his friend Ibrahim Khán, a
zomiñdár of the Gujranwala district. When the latter died his son
Ghulam Shah became faqir. He was in turn succeeded by his son,
Kesar Shah who founded a sect. He died aged 65 in 1863 and his son,
Muhammad Husain or Súbe Shah, then became its leader. Hindus as
well as Muhammadans can enter it, and the latter, though supposed
to follow the Qádria tenets, do not abstain from wine, do not fast or
pray, and are fond of sport. When a new member is admitted there
is no ceremony, nor is he bound to adhere to any prescribed mode of
life. Members of this sect are found in Gujranwála, Sialkot, Shahpur,
Gujrát and Lahore.
Kareál, a Rajput tribe in Ráwalpindi. It belongs to the same group OI
tribes as the Dhúnd and Satti, and holds the hills to the south of the
Satti country. The Ketwál claim descent from Alexander the Great (!)
and say that thoy are far older inhabitants of these hills than either
* Said to be from Sindhi daphi, a large wooden spoon : cf. Multáni Glossary, 2nd ed.
Dicty. p. 20.
+ Thábel is said to be derived from jhaba, a small leather sack used for holding flour,
salt or anything except water. In the Ain.i. Akbari (Blochmann's trans.) they appear as
the Chhabels. This would suggest a derivation from chhamb, a marsh or swamp.



Sao Khải.
489
the Dhund or Satti; bnt the tribe was apparently almost extorminated
by the Dhúnd at some time of which the date is uncertain, and they
are now few and unimportant.
BEAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Moltán.
HABERA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Khachí, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Multán..
KHÁDAL, a Ját clan found in the north of Multán tahsil where it settled in
Mughal times from Jawmú.
KBÁDÁNÁ, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
KHÁDAR, a. Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán and in Shahpur.
KHagas, (1) a Ját clan (agricultoral) and (2) a Qureshi clan (agricultural),
both found in Multán (doubtless Khagga).
KØAGAR, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
BHAGGA, a semi-sacred tribe found in the south-west Punjab. Mr. Purser
thus described them: “The Khaggas came to the Montgomery district
after the conquest of Multán by Ranjit Singh. They claim to be
Qureshi, and name as the first Khagga, Jalál-ul-dín, disciple of
Mubammad Iráq. Khagga is said to mean a peculiar kind of fish, and
the name was given to Jalál-ol-dín by his spiritual teacher on the
occasion of his rescuing a boat overtaken by a storm." In Multán the
Khaggas own land in Multan and Mailsi tahsils and are still regarded
with a certain amount of respect. In the troublons days before Sáwan
Mal if any one was distressed he took refuge with a Khagga, and if a
marauder entered a Khagga's house he was miraculously struck blind.
KHAINTWÁL, a Rájput tribe : see Ketwál.
KHAIRI, a sept of Rájputs, descended from Zá hir Chand, a son of Tárá
Chand, 31st Rájá of Kahlúr.
KHÁJAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KHAJAN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar..
KAAJJI, a tribe in Bahawalpur, some of whom are khatiks or tanners by
profession.
KAAK, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Kabírwalá tahsil, Multán district,
and reputed to be one of the four most ancient tribes in that tract, the
other three being the Panda, Pahor and Sahú.
Khaka, a Hindu Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KHAKBA, said to be a not uncommon epithet to apply to any petty Khatri
trader. The Kbakhas are in fact Khatris converted to Islám, and are
found 10 greatest cumbers in the Kashmir hills, lying along the left
bank of tho Jhelum; whence a few have made their way in to Hazára,
and Ráwalpindi. Sir George Campbell called them “a curiously
handsome people.
KHAKI (1) Ját clan found in & more or less solid block betweon the
Núns and the Chenab river, in the Shujábad tabsıl of Multán, where
they settled from Bhatoer in Jahángír's time, and (2) a class of
КАЗвонь.



490
Khákwani-Khalil.
KhákwÁNI, a Pathán family of Multán, which derives its name from Khákán,
a village near Herat or from an incident connected with the hunting
of the boar (khok). Ali Muhammad Khán of this family was Sábahdár
of Multán under Ahmad Shah Abdáli till 1767 A. D., whon he was put
to death.
Koal, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KHALAFZAí, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KEALAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Khalání, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KHACÍra, Arab, a successor. (1) a title not infrequently borne by the succes-
sors of famous saints, especially in the south-west Punjab* ; (2) a term
said to be applied to Mírásis who are servants of Pírzádas; (3) a title
bestowed half satirically upon Darzis or tailors. It is said to be the
title of thə head of a guild of Dhobis.
Knalít, a tribe of the Ghoria Khel Patháns. It occupies the left bank of
the Bára river, and the country aloog the front of the Khyber in the
Peshawar plains between that pass and the Dáúdzai. Of its four main
clans, Matuzai, Bározai, Ishaqzai and Tilarzai, the Bározai is the most
powerful. The Khalil are not good cultivators. According to Raverty
the Khalíls were in the early Mughal period an exceedingly power-
ful tribe, the strongest among the Ghwaria or Ghoria Pathans, and
having compelled th, Khashi Pathans many years before to abandon
Gára and Nushki they first occupied part of Bajaur with some of
Yúsafzais about 1517 A. D., but they subsequently drore their allies
out of that territory,t and in 1550 we find them in possession of the
country immediately west of the Khyber. Like the Mohmands they
threw in their lot with Kámrán and took part in the attack on Humá.
yún's camp in which Hindál lost his life. They must have suffered
heavily in Kámrán's final defeat by Humáyún. But the real cause of
their downfall was the hostility of the Khashi Afgháns. Holding, as
they did, all the coantry from Dhaka to Attock, with the Khyber and
Kbarappa passes, they had become very rich, for the Peshawar district
was very fruitful and as the royal road lay through it and all the trad-
ing caravans halted at Bagrám (Pesháwar), the Khalíls levied tolls on
them in return for escorts, and as their wealth increased so did their
ry aloond the mai, the ccordinkingly po and
* For instances see the Baháwalpur Gazetteer, Chap. I, C; and also Temple's Legends
of the Punjab, III, p. 173, where Pir Wali, a follower of Mián Shaikh Ghaus Wali of
Jullundur, is said to have borne the title of Khalifa Irshad, 'the expounder of the orders
of God.'
+ Elsewhere Raverty gives a fuller account of these operations in Bájaur. He relates
how a portion of the Khalíls having quarrelled with the other Ghoria Khel, left Tarnak and
Kalát.i.Ghilrai and settled in the Láshoặa valley in Bíjaur. Then in alliance with the
Yúsufzais and Mandars they defeated the Dilazáks under Malik Haibu and partitioned
Bájaur among themselves and their allies, but they soon fell out with them and drove them
out of Bájaur. The Yusufzai and Mandar, however, soon combined with tbe Umr Khel
Dilazáks and, though the Khalíls retreated to the fastnesses of the Hindu-Ráj range,
they secured the help of the Hindu-Rájis, who were probably Arabs, and surrounded the
Khalíls in the Chhármang valley. Here the Khalíls were completely defeated and lost
so many captives that Khalil boys and maidens were sold for a pot a-piece, until Malik
Ahmad and other chiefs of Yúsufzai and Mandaş directed that all the Khalil prisoners should
be set free. The Khalíls however pever regained Bajaur.



Khalj-Khand.
491
arrogance. The plunder of a Yusufzai caravan, the murders of the
two sons of the Malik of the Abazai and of the Gagiáni Malik, who was
venerated as a saint, in a Khalíl mosque, roused the Khashis and their
allies to fury and under Khán Kaju they overthrew the Khalíls, at
Shaikh Tapúr in 1549 or 1550, according to Raverty.*
The present Khalil tappa or tribal area consists of a tract 20 miles
long by 10 broad along the foot of the Khyber hills from the Kábul
river southward to the Mohmand tappa. It is 73 square miles in area.
In great measure resembling the Yusufzais the Khalíls wear in winter
dark blue coats of quilted cotton which are discarded in summer for a
large Afghán skirt. A wbite and blue turban, with a lungi twisted round
the waist or thrown over the shoulder completes the costume. Shah
Jahán conferred the title of arbábt on Muhammad Asíl Kháp, Khalíl,
and their chiefs have borne it ever sioce, instead of the older title of
malik. The arbábs all belong to the Mitha Khel section.
KHALJ, an extinct tribe of Turk origin, claiming descent from Khalj, son of
Yafisi (Japheth), according to one tradition. It was akin to the Ghuzz.
A portion of this great tribe was settled in Garmsír, and some held
lands in Nangrahár, north of the Kirmán district, several centuries
before the Afgháns came into it. The pressure of the Mughal invasions
however compelled them to move eastwards, and in the latter part of
the year 623 H. a body of Khalj, which formed part of the Khwárazmi
forces, overran Mansúra, in Sewistán. It was however overthrown by
Násir-ud-Din Kabájah and its chief slain. The Khalj gave sovereigns
to Lakhnauți (Bengal), but as a tribe it never established itself in
India. The Khalj are entirely distinct from the Ghilzai Patháng.
Kaálsa.--The Sikh Commonwealth. According to Cunningham the Khalsa
Were the followers of Govind Singh, as opposed to the Khulása, or
followers of Nának. He adds that the Surbat Khálsa or whole Sikh
people met once a year at Amritsar. T'he terms Khulása and Surbat
Khálsa are now ousolete, the latter being replaced by Tat Khálsa.
Khalwá), a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Khámas, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KHAMÁN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Køang, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KAAND, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur. It is, however, mainly
found in Peshawar, occupying a few villages east of the city of that
aame. It claims indeed to have once occupied the whole country be-
tween Peshawar and Nowshera. Folk-etymology derives its name from
the Hind ko word khand, one whose front teeth are broken,' because its
ancestor once received in battle a blow on the face which broke his front
teeth. Another derivation is from khund, sugar,' because the tribe
* But it must have been later, while Humáyún and Kámrán were engaged in their final
struggle beyond the Hindu Koh..
Plof rabb (Arab.), 'lord.'
| Yáfis received from Núh (Noah) the famous stone which produced rain and other
blessings.
8. History of the Sikhs, p.



492
Khand custom.
once entertained a king who had come into its territory to hunt with
bread and sugar. The name no doubt suggests sobre connection with
Gandhára, the ancient name of the Peshawar valley, but the tribal
tradition is that Mahmud of Ghazni on his return from one of his
expeditions to Hindustan brought the Khands back with him from some
part of the Punjab and settled thein in the Peshawar valley which was
then uninhabited and slled with thick jungle.* The tribe, on the other
hand, says it was converted to Islám before the time of Mahmúd's oon.''
quests, though its head assumed his name as a compliment to him. Its
leaders, who affect the title of arháb, claim descent from this Mahmud
Khan and his brother Muhammad Khan. In appearance the Khands
do not differ from the other inhabitants of the valley, and the ordinary
tribesmen are hardly distinguished from their Awán neighbours. In-
deed they are often called, and call themselves, Awans, though the
latter tribe does not admit the kioship. The Khands however claim to
be superior to the Awáns, and the kamíns or menials of Khand villages
are actually called Awáns. Both tribes speak Hindko as well as Pashto.
The Khands commonly intermarry with Awáns, as well as with
Patbáns; and marriage with the kamins who are called Awáns
is also allowed provided they do not follow an upclian occupa-
tion. Marriage with impure castes such as Mochis and Chamárs is
also forbidden. The Khands have no sub-divisions, though they
are divided into about a score of biradaris or brotherhoods which
all intermarry, except that the arbábs only form alliance with the
biradari, named Lála, which is descended from Muhammad Khán.
Outsiders of good caste are admitted into the tribe, if they wish it,
on marriage with a Khand woman, but, unlike other married Khands,
when visiting their wives' parents they are not admitted into the
women's apartinents. There is no ceremony of admission. Marriage
is sometimes infant, sometimes adult, and it is permissible between
cousins german. Marriages are arranged by the parents, any other
being viewed with disfavour. Adult marriage is usual at from 15
to 20 for boys and from 13 to 16 for girls, and marriage at a later age
for girls is unknown, a girl who remains unmarried in her father's
house being honoured rather than despisedt and succeeding on his
death to a full share of his estate for life. Adultery is regarded with
abhorrence, the man being heavily fined by a jirga of bis fellow-villagers
and the woman divorced by her husband ander the pressure of public
opinion. In all other observances, such as weddings and funerals,
the general Muhammadan custom prevails, but inheritance is governed
by custom not by Muhaınmadan Law. The Khands are Suunis and
affect four well known ziárats within their borders, viz., those of
Akhún Darweza Sáhib, Mián Shaikh Umr Sahib, Akhún Panja Sáhib,
and Káka Sahib. None of these was a Khand or has any particular
connection with the tribe. Annual fairs are held at their shrines.
The most noteworthy is that of the Káka Sáhib, which takos place
* Contrast this tradition with the statement made in the history of the Khalils, at the
time of whose advent to the Peshawar valley it was extremely fertile. The Khalil chiefs
are also styled arbáb.
+ The institution of musalla.nashini, so common in the Ráwalpindi district, is clearly
alluded to.



Khandoya-Khánzáda.
493
on 16th-20th Rajab, as it is said that the saint died on one of these
days. The Káka Sáhib lived in the time of Aurangzeb and is therefore
comparatively modern. But on the anniversary of his death, at the
time of the fair, his people, the Káka Khel Patháns, put out cooked
meats and rice, etc., by the shrine, which are then carried off by the
pilgrims.
KEANDOYA, a tribe (agricultural) found in Jhelum. They appear to be
a branch of the Chanbán Rájputs.*
KHANDYR, a Kamboh clan (agricoltural) found in Amritsar,
KHÁNGUBWA), a synonym of Khánzáda, q. v.
KHANJAN, 2 Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Kaanna, lit. . half,' a section of the Khatris,
KHÁNUÁNA, & sept of the Sials.
Koánzáda.-A tribe of Rajputs, practically confined to the Gurgaon district
in the Punjab but also found in Alwar, in which State, Captain Powlett.
thus described them :-
“ They are the Mewati chiefs of the Persian bistorians, who were probably the repre.
sentatives of the ancient Lords of Mewát. These Mewátis are called Khánzádas, a race
which, though Musalmán like the Meos, was and is socially far superior to the Meos, and
has no love for them; but who in times past have united with them in the raids and
insurrectious for which Mewát was so famous, and wbich made it a thorn in the side of
Delhi emperors. In fact, the expression Mewati usually refers to the ruling class, wbile
Meo designates the lower orders. The latter term is evidently not of modern Origio,
thoagh it is not, I believe, met with in history; and the former is, I think, now unusual,
Khánzáda having taken its place.
“The Khánzádas are numerically insignificant, and they cannot pow be reckoned among
tho aristocracy. In social rank they are far above the Meos, and though probably of more
rooent Hinda extraction, they are better Masalmáns. They observe no Hinda festivals,
and will not acknowledge that they pay any respect to Hindu shrines. But Brahmans
take part in their marriage contracts, and they observe some Hindu marriage ceremonies.
Thougla gunerally as poor and igaorant as the Moos, they unlike the latter say their
prayers, and do not let their women work in the fields.
They are not first-rate agriculturists, the seclusion of their women giving them a
digadvantage beside most other castes. Some have emigrated and taken to trade in the
Gangetio cities, but these have no connection now with the original Khánzáda country.
Those who have not abandoned the traditions of their clan are often glad of military ser.
vice, and about fifty are in British regiments. In the service of the Alwar State there are
many. There are 26 Khánzáda villages in the State, in most of which the proprietors
themselves work in the field and follow the plough.
“The term Khánzáda is probably derived from Khánazad, for it appears that Bahadur
Náhar, the first of the race mentioned in the Persian bistories, associated himself with
the turbulent slaves of Firoz Sháb after the death of the latter, and, being a pervert,
would contemptuously receive the name of Khánnzád (elare) from bis brethren. The
Khánzádas themselves indigeantly repudiate this derivation, and say the word is Khan
Jádú (or Lord Jádú), and was intended to reder still nobler the name of the princely
Rajput race from wbich they came. Converted Jádós were called by the old Muaalmán
hisoriaas Mewitis, a term Oband applies to a Mewát chief of the Lunar race, of which
race the Jádú Mahárája of Kasquli calls bimself the head."
To this Mr. Channing added :
" Khánzádas are a race who were formerly of much more importance than at pronont;
they claim to have been formerly Jádú Rajpats, and that their ancestors Lakhan Pal and
Sumitr Pál, who dweit at Tahangarh in Bhartpur, were converted to Islám in the reiga of
Firoz Shah (A, D. 1851 to 1388), who gave Lakhan Pál the name of Náhir Xháu and
Sumitr Pál the name of Bahadur Khán, aod in recognition of their high descent called
* Punjab Record, 83 of 1896.



494.
Khar-Khariah.
thom Khánzádas and made them bear role in Mewát. At first they are said to bave lived
at Sarabta Dear Tijára, and afterwards, according to tradition, they possessed 1,484
villages. However this may be, there is no doubt that they were the ruling race in
Mewát down to the time of Bábar; since then they have gradually declined in importance,
and now in this distriot own only a few villages near Xúh and to the north of Firozpur.
Traces of their former importauce exist at Sohna, Buodsi, and Kotila. Kotila was one
of their chief fortresses; the village is situated in a small valley, wholly surrounded by
the hill, except where a small funnel-like pass gires entrance to it. In front of tbis pasa
is the Kotila jhil, and when this is filled with water the only road to the pass lies along
a narrow strip of land between the lake and the hill. The remains of a breastwork along
the face of the bill and across the mouth of the pass still exist, while on the hill above
the village is a small ruined fort. The village now belongs to Meos. Some of the build-
ings bear witness to its former greater importance. I have a suspicion that they are
more intimately connected than they acknowledge with the Meos, whom they seem to me
to resemble in personal appearance. They do not ordinarily iniermarry with Moos, but
the Moo inhabitants of five villages in the Firozpur tahsil profess to have been formerly
Khánzádas, and to have become Meos by intermarriage. Their traditions also, which
point to Sarahta as their ancient honie, agree, I think it will be foand, with those of more
than one clan of Meos. If my supposition that the Meos are converted Mioas is correot,
I am inclined to suspect that the Khápzádas are the representatives of the noble class
among the aboriginal population. Tod mentions an Asíl or unmixed class among the
Minas, koown as Maipas."
T'he Khánzádas of Gurgaon call themselves Jádábansi by clan, and
they commonly say that this is their only got. Khánzáda, or “the
son of a Khán," is precisely the Musalmán equivalent to the Hindu
Rajput or “son of a Rája"; and there can be little doubt that the
Khánzádas are to the Meos what the Rájputs are to the Játs.
Kuar, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán. It traces its origin to
the Kharrals of Montgomery and Lahore, accounting for its truncated
name by a tale that once a party of Kharrals from the Labore Bár
encamped pear a field of sugarcane in Multan and cut the cane to
feed their cattle and make huts of it. When the owner of the field
complained they declared that they thought the cane was a kind of reed.
So they were dubbed khar, ' ass' in Persian.
KHÁra, a Ját tribe, found it Nábha. It claims Chbatriya descent, and
says its ancestor hela office at the Delhi court, but his son Khára
became a robber and went to Khandúr where he married a woman of
another tribe and so became a Ját. The Kháras believe in a sidh
whose shrine is at Khandúr and there they offer panjeri, etc. They
do not use milk or curd until ic has been offered at the shrine. On the
5th of the second half of Baisakh, Maghar and Jeth special offerings
are made there. The sidh was a Khára who used to fall asleep while
grazing his cattle. One day his head. was cut off by robbers, but he pur.
sued them for some yards and the spot where he fell is now his shrine,
and though the Kháras have left Khandúr the sidh is still worshipped.
KHARA, * Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and in Montgomery ;
in the latter district it is Hindu as well as Muhammadan.
KHÁRAK, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán
KAARAL, lit. a mortar, a tribe found in the southern part of the Rachná
: Doáb: see Kharral.
KHARI, E. H. I., V. 278. Possibly the Khattríl, 9.v.
KHARIAH, apparently an offshoot of the Bajwá Játs, descended from Kals,
one of the two sons of Rájá Shalip, the Bajju. Kals had a son by name
Dáwa, whose three sons were Múda, Wasr and Nána, surnamed Chacbra,



Khariála - Khurral.
495
KHARIÁLA, apparently a synonym for, or a class of, Mírási.
KHAROKA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
KHAROPAR, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
KHAROBA.--A small clan of Játs found in Nábha. Uppal, their ancestor, ruled
at Barágaon, a Muhammadan village of Patiala. When he went to pay
the revenue into the treasury he got himself recorded as its owner and
in their resentment the people 'murdered him. His wife on her way to
her father's house, gave birth to a son, on a hard piece of ground,
whence the name Kharauda or Kharora.
KHAKOȚI, a Pathán tribe occupying the hills near the sources of the Gúmal
and the district of Warghún or Arghún to the west of the Sulimankhel
country and south by east of Ghazni. They generally arrive in the
plains towards the end of November and depart in May. Their kirris or
encampments during the winter are located near Tánk, Mulazai and
Paharpur. They are a poor tribe, and have been nearly ruined by a long
and unequal contest with the Sulimánkhels. This feud, though allowed
to rest during their stay iu Hindustán, breaks out afresh as soon as they
re-enter the hills; though attempts have latterly been made by the
Deputy Commissioner with some success to bring the two tribes to terms.
Most of the Kharotis engage as labourers and carriers like the Násirs.
A large proportion of them are charra folk. Some are merchants, and
trade in dried fruit and nadder.
The Kharoți were identified by Bellew with the Arachoti of Alexan-
der's historians, but though they dwell in the ancient Arachosia, it is
difficult to accept that theory. They claim descent from Tokhi, mother
of Hotak, grandson of Ghilzai, but the Tokhi themselves say they are
descended from a foundling adopted by their tribe. Bellew was pro-
bably right in saying that they and the Násirs are of different origin to
the mass of the Ghilzai.
KHABRAL.---The Kharrals would appear to be a true Rájput tribe, though a
very considerable portion of them are styled Ját. The Rajput Kharrals
of Baháwalpur return their main tribe as Bhatti. The few Kharrals in
Jullurdur are there recognised as Rajputs and those of Montgomery
claim descent from Rájá Karan. The Kbarrals are found in large
numbers only along the valley of the Rávi, from its junction with the
Chenáb to the boundary between Lahore and Montgomery; while a
few have spread up the Deg river into the Lahore and Gujrán wála bár,
and smaller numbers are found all along the Sutlej valley as high up
as Ferozepor. The tribes of this portion of the Rávi, are divided into
two classes, the Great Rávi tribes and the NIkks or Little Rávi tribes.
Among the former tribes the Kharrals are the most northerly and one of
the most important. They are themselves divided into two factions, the
upper Rávi and lower Rávi, the head-quarters of the latter being at
Kot Kamália. The two are at bitter feud, and the only tie between them
is their hatred of their common enemy, the Siál Rájputs of Jhang. The
Kamalia Kharrals rose to some prominence in the time of Alamgir, and
still hold remains of grants then made them, but the upper Kharrals are
now tbe more powerful branch of the two. The Kharrals have ever been
notorious for turbulence, and Mr. Purser's Montgomery Settlement Report
contains details of their doings before and under Sikh rule, while the
L



498
Tho Kharrals.
history of the family is narrated in full at pages 509ff of Griffin's Panjab
Chief:. They trace their origin from one Bhúpa, a descendant of
Rája Karan, who settled at Uch and was there converted by Makhdum
Sbáh Jahánián. From Uch they moved up to their present territory.
There are now very few in the Multán district; but the fact of their
being found along the Sutlej, though in small numbers only, lends some
support to the story of their baving come upwards from below. Captain
Elphinstone thus described the Kharrals in his Gogaira Settlemont
Report:-
“The 'Kbarrals' are the most portherly of the Great Rávi' tribes. They occupy a
great portion of the land between Gogaira and the Labore district, up both sides of the
river, and extend some distance into tbe Gujranwala district. In torbulence and courago
they have been always considered to excel all the others except the Kithias; but tho
tract occupied by them has been gradually denuded by the rapid extension of cultivation,
of what formerly constituted their greatest strength, --heavy jungle. In case of diatarb-
auces, therefore, they have had at more recent periods to evacuate their own lande on
the approach of large wilitary forces, thug sustaining much damage by the destruction of
their villages. Their most colebrated leader, Abmad Khán, wbo was killed in Septomber
1857 by a detachment under Captain Black, headed the combined tribor, however, in no
less than five insurrections, which to a certain extent all proved sucoersfol, their chiot
object--the plunder of the Khatris und Hindus-having usually been accomplished at the
expenso of a moderate fino imposed on them under the name of nazarána, after the con•
clusion of peace. This success had spread his renown far and wide, and had given bim
a great influence over the whole of the 'Great Rávi,' as was proved by the outbreak of
1857, which appears to have been mainly planned and organized by him. In stature the
Khurruls are generally above the average height, their features are very marked, and
tbeir activity and endurance are remarkable. Like all the other Játs they pretond to a
descent from the Rájputs, and like that class look down with some contempt opon men
who handle the plough. The cultivation in their villages is, therefore, almost exolusively
left to the Wásiwáns and inferior castes, the Kharral proprietors contenting themselves
with realizing their sbare of the produce. They only possess land in tracts inundated by
tbe rivers, mere well.cultivation being too laborious a task even for their dependants,"
Mr. Purser adds that they are wasteful in marriage expenditure,
hospitable to travellers, thievish, and with little taste for agriculturo ;
and that they still follow many Hindu customs, especially on tbe occa-
sion of marriage. In Lahore they appear to bear à no better character
than in Montgomery ; and there is a Pereian proverb : “ The Dogar,
the Bhatti, the Waţtu, and the Kharral are all rebellious and ought to
be slain." Sir Lepel Griffin wrote of them: “ Through all historic
times the Kharrals have been a turbulent, savage, and thievish tribe,
over impatient of control, and delighting in strife and plunder. More
fanatic than other Muhainmadan tribes, they cubmitted with the greatest
reluctance to Hindu rule ; and it was as much as Diwán Sáwan Mal and
the Sikhs could do to restrain them; for whenever an organised force
was sent against them they retired into the marshes and thick jungles,
where it was almost impossible to follow them.” In Gujranwala they
are said to be "idle, troublesome, bad cultivators and notorious thieves,
their persons generally tall and handsome, and their habits nomad and
prædatory."
From notes collected by Mr. E. D. Maclagan in Jhang it appears
that the Kharrals in that District claim to be Punwárs* and connected
with Rája Jagdeo, not Karn. They say they have been on the Rávi
from time immemorial. They practise karowa (which accounts for their
* This accords with the Multán tradition that tho Langhâc are Punwárs and allied to
the Kharrals, Harrals, Bautias and Laks : Multán Gaselteer, 1902, p. 138.



Visa.
A Kharral pedigree.
497
being ranked as Ját*) and give wives only to Khichis and Awáus, but
take them from Chaddrars, Kamokes, Harrals and even Siáls. But in
the Chenab colony at any rate they do not appear to get wives from
Sials, and for that tribe we should read Othwals in chat tract. They
give a long pedigree which is reproduced here to make what follows
clea':-
Pánwár.
(Kaulra.)
Udsdip.
Vású.
Jagdeo.
Jaissa.
Kásim
Katral.
Jaita.
Gaidal.
sulangi.
Mkiá.
Vimián.
Butta.
Umar. Bhágú. Dullu
Aira.
Yagab.
Jajja.
Rajádá.
Jaisal.
Rénú.
Sardád. Alladad. Pira. Panja. Firoz.
Khiva.
Kharral.
Upa.
salih.
Quba.
Takhou.
Buddh.
Baja. Boga. Fatúr,
Gaddan.
Deore.
Udrath.
Sareg.
Jagsin.
Kaulra.
Manf.
Mání,
AKIL
Vanám.
Gulla.
Sahi.
Mal.
Jáin, Sarwar. Sajáwal. (?)
SÁhí.
Mál.
Rustam,
Amír.
Lál.
Nathu.
Hassan.
Ahmad Khán
(the rebel of 1857)
Satar.
Muhammad Kház
Dealat Khín (at present of JAmrs in Montgomery.
living in Pandnáwála).
Of these Jaisal was the first to come west to Dánábád in Montgomery.
After Kharral's time the tribe began to disperse to Jámra and elsewhere.
Vású is the head of the Kamália section : and Akil's descendants live
south of it. Jagdeo was a great king with long arms that reached below
his kuees : and he could break a tilis (staff) over his knees.
* In Shahpur also the Kharrals are classed as Ját (agricultural),



498
Kharral clan.
Butta or Butti Sultán was a Kharral chief in the time of Muhammad
of Ghor, and was converted to Islám by Pír Sher Shah Sayyid Jalál.
The following ballad about him was given by a mírásí of the tribe :-
Kúk de dar de Solgi
When the Solgi tribo fled from fear of the
Kák
Aise anche Butte Rá sỉ,
To the mighty Butte Ráo,
Sádá bas banárú to Kóknai ;
We lived at Kákanai;
Sainundri sota juláhin,
Thou art a sea, we & river, comfort us
(let swing).
Así dhrúan, Butte Sultán;
We are weak, Sultán Butta ;
Ambar pakar tu leiiá búhí;
Do thou, who art like the sky, take us by
the arm :
Así dhrúan, Butta Sultán;
We are weak, Butta Sultán;
Arwe he áin.
We have this moment come.
The same mírásí gave the following cháp :-
Kharral Réjá Panjnad ke,
The Kharrals are Rájás of the Panjnad,*
Bábar ku mumia tikini.
And have been there since Bábar's time.
Kharral kú hukm Láhaur te.
The Kharrals rule as far as Lahore.
Nál Nawába te kass kamáná.
They draw the bow along with Nawabs.
The Kharrals of the Sándal Bár are the most satisfactory of all the
nomad tribes in the Chenáb Colony, now included in the Lyallpur dis-
trict. Usually above the average height and good looking, with marked
features, they are at least the equals of the Siáls in strength and ac-
tivity, and the latter decline to give them an opportunity of measuring
strength at two ends of a rope, Some of their leaders are remarkably
energetic and intelligent. Once largely addicted to female infanticide,
the Kharrals have quite given up that practice and in the Colony now
number as many females as inales. Like other nomads of the Bár the
Kharrals are averse to sleeping under a heavy roof and prefer a small
thatched cottage. They have a tradition that the Prophet Sulaimán
forbade them to sleep in roofed houses under penalty of the extinction
of the family and their proverb ran :
Kharral di pakhi, na ghun na makhi,
'A Kharral is free from troubles, for he lives in a thatched hut.'
The Kharrals have several clans. The Lakhera, which has its head.
quarters at Kot Kamália, an ancient town refounded by Kamál Kbán,
its chief in the 14th century, was never numerically strong as a clan
but it attained some importance under Saádatyár Khán of Kamália who
obtained a jágír in the reign of Alamgír. The Lakhera were, however,
at feud with the Upera Kharrals of the upper Rávi and succumbed to
the Siáls even in Saádatyár Khán's lifetime. They regained their in-
dependence, but only to be conquered by the Nikkái Sikhs and had in
recent times largely lost all control over the Bár, only a fow Baloch
tribes, with their old adherents, the Káthidas, Baghelas and Wahniwáls,
standing by them. Most of the Kharrals in the Colony belong to the
Upera clan.
Two clans, often called Chuhệera Kharrals, class themselves as
Kharrals, but they do not really belong to the tribe. These are the
Piroke and Jálálke and they are called Chuhſora, because the famous
Chuhța dacoit Sandal, who gave his name to the Sándal Bár,t refused to
* Apparently meant for Punjab.
For another derivation see under Shoondal.



Kharsin-Khás-Kheli.
499.
allow the Kbarrals to graze in it, unless they provided him with a
bride. To this degradation the Kharrals at last assented, and when he
went to fetch his wife Sándal was received with great ponip, but he
and his companions were treacherously blown up with gun-powder con
cealed under the grass on which the feast was spread. The Kharrals
then took the Chuhra women to wife. Their descendants are the
Chuhrera Kharrals and their appearance is said to give colour to the
tradition.
The Kharrals in Baháwalpur have. 15 septs :-Jag-sin, Salar-sin,
Gugera, Tughera, Mamkbera, Chuharera, Sahi, Bhandára, Ran-sin,
Jagwera, Fatwera, Jaswera, Darwesha, and Cbahlak, and Gaddan, and 4
small muhins or sub-septs Kakla, Jameka, Paropiá, and Miána.
There are two famous religious families of Kharrals (i) the Sáhib.
zadagán-i-Mahárwi and Mangherwi, the descendants of Khwája Núr
Muhammad, the Qibla-i-Alim, and (ii) the Miáns of the Sahib-us-Sair
shrine. Both own vast areas, and Mián Fazl Haq, Mangherwi, pays
R.9. 10,000 a year in land revenue.
KHARSIN, see Gharsin.
KHARWÁL, see GharwÁL.
KHARWÁLA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KHARYE, a Ját clan (agricultural) fouod in Amritsar.
Khash, Khaush, a class or group of Kanets found in Kullu and in the Simla
Hill States of Kotkbái, Balsan, Jubbal, Bashahr, etc. It comprises a
number of khels, such as the Khashţa in Kanaur. The Khash takes
Kurán girls in marriage, but does not give them to Kuráns. The
Khash is also styled Kaţál, 9. v. In Bashahr the Khash Kanets who
hold good positions in the State service and so on observe the rites
of the Brahmans and other twice-born castes.
KHÁshá, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
KHABOB, KHASSÚR, a Pathán sept which with the Umr Khel and Malli
Khel forms a small tribe which holds the so called Khasor hills on the
south-western extension of the Salt Range which lies on the right bank
of the Indus. The Khasor belong to the Mati division of the Patháng
and claim descent from Ibrahim the Loni, son of Bíbi Mato, daughter
of Shaikh Baig. Ibrahím's son Siánai had two sons, Prangi and Ismail
and the former had nine eons, one of whom was named Khasyúr, the
ancestor of the Khassúrs. Ibbetson dates their settlement in the hills
of the Khassúr Afgháns early in the 13th century, but it was probably
somewhat later.
Ka Ás-KHELI, a tribe found in Bahawalpur. It is an offshoot of the
Mácbhis and its members were in the service of the Abbási Kháns.
A Khás-Kheli, Yakub Muhammad, Ose to be pack of Bahawal Khán
III, but after the death of Bahawal Khán IV their influence declined
and now they have not access to the Darbár.
son Sidhani Loreda son of "Bibi fathe Pathan's



500
Kháti Khatik.
KHÁTI,* an occupational term used in the north of Sirsa and the Phulkian
States for the carpenter and blacksmith (Lohár) and generally in the
eastern plains for the carpenter, except on the Jumpa where the term
used is Bárhi. Thus in Hissár Káthi includes the Hindu carpenter
of the south-eastern Punjab and tbe SUTHAR or carpenter of the
Bágar, who is a distinct tribe from the former. The Suthar too
affects & certain superiority over the Kháti, as he has taken to
agriculture to a considerable extent while the Kháti has not; and he
does not intermarry with him. Many Khátis are by sect Bishnoi,
bat they do not intermarry with other Bishnoi Castes such as the
Bishnoi Játs. See under Tarkhán.
Khariks.t-Tho Khatiks are only found in any numbers in the Jumpa
zone, in Sirsa, in Patiala, and the other Phulkiáp States. They are
par excellence tappers and dyers of goats' skins, and claim to be
of Hiodu status because they do not eat dead animals though they
use flesh and liquor. Brahma, they say, assigned to thom & goat's
skin, the bark of trees and lac-so they graze cattle, dye the skins of
goats and deer, and tan hides with bark and lac. Their priests are
Gaur Brahmans who officiate in the phera rite at weddings and in the
kiria at funerals, although the Rbatīks are menials, and only Chuhras:
and Chamárs will drink water at their hands. In the Bawal nizámat
of Nábha the Bágrif group is found which claims Khatrí descent, and
has four gots, the Jatoria pained from the place whepce it migrated,
and the Bairiwal, Aswal and Kenchí which three latter are numeri-
cally large. Khatíks only avoid one got in marriage and allow widow
remarriage. Their women wear no nose-ring. The tribe worships
Bhairon and Sidh Masáni, aiso known as Mátá Masáni. At Hájípur in
Alwar, where there is a shrine of the goddess Durga, they perform
children's first tonsure and the bride and bridegroom are also taken to
worship at the sbrine. The gurús of the Hindu Khatiks are Nának.
panthi Sikhs, yet they observe none of the Sikk tenets. In the Phúl
and Amloh nizámats of Nábha are found two classes of Muhammadan
Khatiks—the Rájpat and Ghori Pathán groups, each of which is as a
rule endogamous.
The Khatiks are sometimes confused with the Chamrang, but the
latter tans baffalo and ox hides with lime, and dous not dya loather, so
that he ranks below the Kbatík who tans and dyes only sheep and
goat skins, using salt and the juice of the madár (Calotropis procera),
· but no lime. On the other hand, the Khatik is certainly below the
Chamár because he will keep pigs and poultry, which a Obainár would
not do; and he will even act as a butcher, it is said, though this appears
unlikely as he is of so low a status. He is however possibly a
* Kbáti is defined by Platts (Hindustani Dicty., p. 867) to be a caste of Bindas who
are generally employed as cartwrights, a carpenter, Káth is wood or timber in Hindi
and in Multáni káthi or káth. The derivation of Kháti is obscure.
+ The Khatik is a caste of Hindustan and the pame is defined by Platts (Hindustani
Dicty., p. 872) to mean a hunter, a low caste which keeps pigs and poultry, & tander,
i. a. Khatík. The word is used in a very pague way and probably the Hindu Kliatik
big.keeper of the eastern Punjab is a Porbia iwiwigraut, wbile the Mubammadan Khatik
of tbe west is a Chanár who has takeu to tauuivy. But iu Nábba at any rate the Bindu
Khatik is certainly a tanner.
ti, e., immigrauts from the Bagar.



Khatram Khatri.
501
pork-butcher. He is also said to keep sheep ard goats and twist their
hair into waist bands for sale. Tho Khatík appears to be by origin
& scavenger who is rising in the social scale by taking to dyeing and
tanning, but has not yet attained to the status of a worker in leather.
He is closely akin to the Pási and may even be a sub-group of that
08ste.
KBATRA, a Hindu Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Khatrái, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KĦATBí, or less correctly KHATTRI, fem. Khatrání dim. KHATRETÁ, fem. -í,
& child of the Khatrí caste. Khatrí appears to be unquestionably a
Prakritised form of the Sanskr. Kshatriya. Philologically Kshatriya
appears tu be connected with Sanskr. kshatra country. The Pers.
Kshatrapá is derived from the same root and pá-, 'to protect.' Oxford
Dicty., 8. v. Satrap.
Literature ansigus various prigios to the Khatri caste. According
to the Vishnu Purána, Bharata, the king whose name so constantly
crops op in various forms in the Punjab, had nine sons, whose mothers
put them to death, fearful that he would disown them as they bore no
resemblance to him. Thus left sonless, Bharata sacrificed to the
Maruts and they gave bim Bharadwája, son of Brihaspati by Mamata.
Bharadwaja had four grandsons, of whom two became Brahmans while
two remained Khatris, though all continued to be of the Bharadwája
gotra.
The Aogiras-gotri Khatris are described as descended from Agni,
Havishmat cr Havirbhuja, as be also called, though the Havishmats
or Harismats are also said to be descendants of Angiras and the
great progenitors of the Kshatriyas.
The Kausika-gotri Khatris are of Lunar descent, through Kusa, the
king who was 11th in descent from Soma god 9th from King Pururavas.
But one of Kusa's four solis had a descendant Vishvamitra whose family
became Brahmaps. To this gotra belongs the Khanna got of the modern
Khatris.
The Kausilya or Kausalya-gotri Khatris are of Solar race, King
Kausalya or Hiranyapábha Kausilya their yponym, being 22nd' in de
scent from Raghu.
To this gotra belong the Mihira Khatris, the Kapura got being by
gotra Kautsika.
Time was when Brahmans intermarried with Khatris on equal terms,
but this has long since ceased to be allowed. The Sargut or Saraswat
Brahmans, who are the parohits of the Khatris,* will, however, eat any
foud prepared by a Khatri, a privilege said to be denied to & Rájput.
And the true Saraswat will accept gifts from Khatris alone, in accord.
ance with the aucient rule that a Brahman shall only accept gifts from
the warrior class.
* For instance the Jetli Sársut, who are descendants of Jetal, a son of Vasishta muni
priest to Rám Chandra, are purohits of the Mihira or Mahra Khatris to this day.



502
The term Kshatriya.
Rationally interpreted these historical legends say clearly enough
that the Khatri caste is made up of at least three probably racial ele-
ments, Solar, Lunar and the Agni-kula or Fire-race. Of those races
some families became Brahmans and others remained Kshatriyas.
Others, according to the Mahabharata, became Vaisyas, Sudras or even
barbers.
The meaning of the word Kshatriya is usually said to be warrior, or at
least the Kshatriya* is described as the warrior class. But Fick has an
instructive passage on this point and says: ' Kshatriya corresponds to
the Vedic rájanya and is applied to the successors of the conquering
families under whose leadership the Aryan stocks had secured their
new settlements in the Gangetic lands, and, also, to the overlords of
the indigenous peoples who had been able to maintain their independence
in the war against the foreign invaders. The Kshatriyas then were not
by any means of one and the same race. They represented the political
power and embodied the idea of a community which stood above the
family, above the caste, the idea of the State. We have no right to
speak of a Kshatriya' caste' in the modern sense of that term. The
Kshatriyas formed a ruling class and were not necessarily warriors, any
more than the army was necessarily recruited only from Kshatriyas.'
As the name of a ruling race, or as the title of several ruling fami-
lies, the term Kshatriya is of great antiquity. This is not however a
place for a discussion of the problems connected with the Kshatriyas'
place in history. “The three great Kshatriya lines," writes Mr.
Pargiter, “the Solar and Lunar and Yádava dynasties, profess to exhibit
more than 50 well-remembered generations."f The following table of .
descent is compiled from his article:
Manu Vaivasvata.
Ikshváku.
Dishtha or Nedishtha.
Ila, his daughter.
Purúravas.
Solar Line.
Solar Line.
Videha Line.
Videha Line.
Ayas.
Nahusha.
Yayati.
Yadu. Turvasu. Druhyú. Anu. Púru.
From Yadu is descended the Yádava race which developed into two
lines, first the Haihaya, sprong from Sahasrajít, son of Yadu, with a
branch called Tálajangha, I and the second line descended from his son
Kroshtu. From Yadu's son Púru sprang the Paurava or Lunar race,
which had two branches, the North Panchala, descended from Ajanidha,
which reigned in Ahichchhatra, and the South Pancbála. Omitting the
* Die sociale Gliederung in Nordoestlichen Indien zu Buddha's Zeit: p. 51.
+ See Ancient Indian Gencalogies and Chronology in J. R. A. 8, 1010, pp. 1–56, by.
F. E. Pargiter, M, A.
I Sprung from Tálajangha, grandson of Arjuna.
Jyámagba, the Yádava, married a Shaivya princess,



Kshatriya history.
508
dynasties which had no connection with the Punjab, we learn that the
descendants of Yayáti's son Anu branched ouš in the north-west into
the Punjab tribes of the Kekayas, Shivis, etc. Shivi, son of Ushinara
of tbis line had four sons who originated the Vrishadarbhas, Suvíras,
Kekayas or Kaikayas and Madras of the Punjab.
The earliest and greatest Vishvamitra was the son of Gádbi or Gá-
thin, king of Kányakubja, and his Kshatriya name was Vishvaratha.
Gádhi's daughter Satyavalí was married to the rishi Richíka Bhargava
and had a son Jamadagni, whose youngest son was Ráma.
Kritavírya, king of the Haihayas, had the Bhargavas* as his priests
and endowed them with great wealth. During the reign of his son
Arjuna, who reigned at Mandháta on the Narrada river, the Haibayas
endeavoured to recover this wealth from the Bhargavas and, failing to
do so, killed or dispersed them. This brought them into conflict with
Ráma, as Arjuna or his sons had robbed Jamadagni, the Bhargava, so
Ráma killed Arjuna, and in revenge the latter's sons murdered Jama-
dagni. Ráma swore vengeance on the Kshatriyas, destroyed all Arjuna's
sons, save five, and thousands of Haihayas ; and moreover he extended
his bostility to all Kshatriyas and exterminated them, according to the
legend, 21 times. But in spite of this 'extermination' the Haihayas
and Tálajanghas soon after overran the whole of North India, which
was simultaneously invaded by foreigu hoides from the north-west.
The curious story which connects Ráma and his brother Shatrughna
with the Yádavas, explains some important territorial facts. Madbu,
called king of the Dänavas,t was a Yadava and his realm extended
from Guzerat to the Madhu-vana or forest on the Junina. Fourth in
descent from him reigned Sattvata whose son Bhíma was contemporary
with Ráma. Shatrughna killed Lavana, I the local ruler, felled the forest
and founded Mathura, but after Ráma's death Bhíma recovered the
city and his son Andhaka reigned there, but Mathura continued to be
also called Shúrasena, after Shatrughna's son who had held charge of it.
Kans, a descendant of Andhka, reigned there however in the Pandavas'
time. Samvarana, the Blárata, was driven out of his kingdom by the
Panchálas and sought refuge in a fortress on the Sindhu for many
years, until a Vasishtha became his priest and encouraged him to
recover his realm. Samvarana's expulsion from it must have been
effected by Sudás, who defeated the kings on the Parushni (Rávi),
after subduing the Lunar kingdom of the Bharatas. His conquests
stirreú up against him the tribes to the west, such as the Yádavas,
of Mathura, the Shivas, or Shivis, descendants of Anu, the Drubyus,
or Gándháras, apparently a tribe which gave its name to Gandhára (the
Pesháwar valley), the Matsyas (to the west of Mathura), the
Turvasha, probably on the north-west of Sudas' kingdom. Samvarana's
dispossession lasted over Sahadeva's reign into Somaka's, and the story
goes that he sacrificed his first-born son Jantu in order to obtain others.
* The modern Dhusars, or Bhargava Dhusars.
† A word still found in the Simla Hills in legends of local gods, but not as the name of
a triba.
$ Doubtless the Lau of Punjab legend,
$ We may surmise the Meos.



504
Kshatriya functions.
This barbarous piece of magic apparently drove Vasishtha to espouse
Samvarana's cause, the more so in that his own sons had been put to
death by Sudás' descendants. After Samvarana came Kuru, who gave
his name to the Kurakshetr. His descendants, the Kauravas, fought
the great fight with the Pandavas and with that event nearly all the
genealogical lists of the Kshatriyas end, as if an era of considerable
prosperity and refinement had abruptly ceased. Whatever the
historical facts may have been there is hardly & name in the semi.
mythical legends of the modern Punjab which does not appear in the
Kshatriya chronicles.
Quite apart from the resemblance of the names Kshatriya and
Khatri the position of the Kshatriya in ancient times finds very close
parallels in his relations to the modern Hindu castes in the Punjab.
The ancient Kshatriya literature was imbued with the historical
spirit. The Ksbatriyas played a very great part in the early days of
Indian history and a consideration of the literature originated by
them is essential to a right understanding of those times. We have
the results of their literary aptitude in toe Epics and Puranas,
overlaid though they be with Brahmipical accretions. The general
trend of the ancient Kshatriya tuaching was monotheistic and ethical.
It was not anti-Brahminical but anti-Brahmanist, and opposed to the
orthodox Brabmaism of the older Upanishads, which was wainly
taught by the Brahmans of the Madhyadesa. The Sánkhya-Yoga
and Bhagavata systems are both in their origips connected with a
number of Kshatriya names.
It is hardly necessary to point how modern Sikhism reproduces
in a most striking way all that is distinctive in the relations of the
ancient Kshatriga to the masses of the Hindu peoples of Northern
India. The position of the Bedi, the Sodhi and other quasi.sacred
sections of the Khattris, as the teachers and leaders of the Játs and
other tribes, is essentially that which they occupied in the time of the
Mahábhárata, and it would be of great interest to investigate whether
the modern Khatri teaching is based on any literary or traditional
descent from the old Kshatriya literature.
Though all the names preserved in the Epics and Puranas belong to.
pre-history, many generations after the war of the Mahabharata elapsed
before the Kshatriya dynasties ended. Thus the Solar line terminates
with Rájá Sumitra, 30th in descent from Brihadhal, who was killed by
Arjun's son Abhimanyu; and the Lunar ends with Kshemak, 25th in
descent from Arjun's grandson.
The well-known legend tells how Parasu Ráma, the Brahman and the sixth incarnation
of Vishnu exterminated the Kshatriyas in 21 attacks, and not content with slaughtering the
men he destroyed even the infants in the womb. 8o the Kshatriya women fled to the
# Dr. G A. Grierson holds that there was in ancient India a long struggle for supremacy
between the Brahmans and the Kshatriyas; that the Kurukshetra or Madhyadesa was the
centre of Brahmaism, all the surrounding countries being unorthodox, their unorthodoxy
being fostered by learned Kshatriyas. Some of these Kshatriyas found an asylum in the
tracts to the east and south of the Madhyadesa, among the Panchálas who permitted poly.
andry like the modern Játs; and that the fons et origo of the Mahábhárata war was the insult
offered by Drupada, the Kshatriya king of the Panchálas, to a Brahmana who sought a refuge
with the Kurus, so that in its essence the war of the Mahabhárata was a cult war between
the Brahmaist Kurus and the Kshatriya-guided Panchálas. J. R. A. 8., 1908, pp. 848-4.,



The Punjab Kshatriyas.
.
505
Sársut Brahmans of Kurukshetr on the Saraswati and when Parasu Ráma demanded their
surrender the Brahmans declared them their own daughters. Parasu Ráma in his wrath
bade them eat kacha bhojan (unlawful food) from their hands as a test of the relationship
and only when they did so did he spare the women. So their children were called Khatris
instead of Chhatris.*
The chronology of the Kshatriyas is still largely a matter of conjec-
ture, and it is not until the period of their decadence sets in that actual
history begins. "In the Puranic lists the earliest dynasty which can
claim historical reality," writes Mr. Vincent Smith, " is that known as
the Saisunaga, from the name of its founder Sisupága'-r Sheshnág."
And the first of this dynasty of whom anything substantial is known
is Bimbisára, or Srenika, the fifth of his line. He ruled circa B. C. 519.
This dynasty was certainly of foreign origin and during its ascendancy
much of the Western Punjab formed the Persian natrapies of India and
Gandaria. Mahánandin, the last of the Saisonága dynasty, had a son
by a Súdra woman and he usurped the throne, establishing the Nanda
dypasty which waged wars of extermination against the Kshatriyas.
The last of the Nine Nandas was in turn deposed by Chandragupta
Maurya (321 B. C.), who found his opportunity in the troubles conse-
quent on Alexander's death in 323 B. C. and became master of north-
western India before he seized the throne of Magadha
But to retrace our footsteps still further back for a moment, it may
be of interest to see whether the Kshatriyas were still existent in the
Punjab at the time of the Macedonian invasion.
It is difficult to accept the identification of the Xathroi of Alexander's
historians with the Kshatriya, though McCrindle appears to favour it.
The Sathroi lay between the Indus and the lower course of the Chenab
(A kesines). Elsewhere McCrindle identifies the Xathroi with the
Kshátri,t a low caste quite distinct from the Kshatriya. (Ancient India,
its Invasion by Alexander, pp. 347 and 156). It is tempting to identify
Poras with Paurava, but he is nowhere described as a Xathros Ön å
satrapés, as he would have been if he had been a Kshatriya. M. Sylvain
Lévi identifies Phegeus or Phegelas whose territory lay between the
Rávi and the Beas, with Bhagalat-the name of a royal race of Kshatriyas
which the Gaua-pátha classes under the rubric Bábu, etc., with the
name even of Taxilas, Omphis, (Sanskr. Ambhi): Ibid. p. 401..
After the Christian era we find the rulers of Brahmaur, now the
Chamba State, bearing the Kshatriya affix Varma for a long period,
froin A. D. 620 to about the end of the 16th century.s
From the debris of the Kshatriya dynasties sprang the Rájpnt fami.
lies, but the exact process of the transformation is obscure. Tradition
has it that the rishis created the four Agoikul Kshatriyas, the Prahar,
Sulankhi, Panwara and Chauhan (names unknown to the earlier Ksha-
triya history) to fight against the infidels. From these Agnikuls sprang
the 36 Rájput Chhatris or Rájput houses of Rájputána. But these
· are Tod hold, doubtless rightly, not pure Kshatriyas, bat descend-
* P. N. Q., I, § 578.
+ The Kshátris are unknown in the modern Punjab. .
Mr. Vincent Smith says Bhagala or Bhagela (whelp) q.v.: Early Hist. of India, 1st ed.,
P. 34.
$ Ohamba Gazetteer, 1904, pp. 69 to 86.. Varma was not a Rajput, but a Kshatriya
afilr, as Sharma was a Brahman and Gupta a Vaisya affix,



506
The Khatri described.
ants (at least in some cases) of converted Buddhists, Huns and Tak-
shaks, affiliatea to the purer Kshatriya families. It is quite certain
that the Rájputs are a far later development than the Kshatriyas.
The Khatri occupies a very different position among the people of
the Punjab from that of the other mercantile castes. Superior to them
in physique, in manliness, and in energy, he is not, like them, a mere
shop-keeper, but a direct representative of the Kshatriya of Manu.
The following extract from Sir George Campbell's Ethnology of India
admirably describes the position of the Khatri :-
" Trade is their main ocupation; but in fact they have broader and more distinguish.
ing features. Besides monopolising the trade of the Punjab and the greater part of
Afghánistán, and doing a good deal beyond those limits, they are in the Panjab che chief
civil administrators, and have almost all literate work in their hands. So far as the Sikbs
have . priesthood, they are, moreover, the priests or gurus of the Sikhs. Both Nának and
Govind were, and the sodis and Bedis of the present day are, Khatris. Thus then they
are in fact in the Punjab, so far as a more energetic race will permit them, all that
Mahratta Brahmios are in the Mahratta country, besides engrossing the trade which the
Mahratta Brahmins have not. They are not usually military in their character, but are
qnita capable of using the sword when necessary. Díwán Sáwan Mal, governor of Multán,
and his notorious successor Múlraj, and very many of Ranjit Singh's chief functionaries,
were Khatris. Even under Muhammadan rolers in the west, they have risen to high
administrative posts. There is a record of a Khatri Diwán of Badakshán or Kunduz; and
I beliere, of a Khatri governor of Pesháwar under the Afgháns. The emperor Akbar's
famous minister, Todur Mal, was a Khatri; and a relative of that man of undoubted
energy, the great Commissariat contractor of Agra, Joti Parshád, lately informed me that
he also is a Khatri. Altogether there can be no doubt that these Khatris are one of the
most acute, energetic, and remarkable races in India, though in fact, except locally in the
Punjab, they are not much known to Europeans. Tbe Khatris are staanch Hindus; and,
it is somewhat singular that, while giving a religion and priests to the Sikhs, they them.
selves are comparatively seldom Sikhs. The Khatris are a very fine, fair, handsome race.
And, as may be gathered from what I have already said, they are very generally educated,
“There is a large subordinate clings of Khatris, somewhat lower, but of equal mercantile
energy, called Rors, or Roras. The proper Khatris of higher grade will often deny all
connexion with them, or at least only admit thąt they have some sort of bastard kindred
with Khatris; but I think there can be no doubt that they are ethnologically the same,
and they are certainly mixed up with Khatris in their avocations. I shall treat the whole
kindred as generically Khatris..
"Speaking of the Khatris then thus oroadly, they have, as I have said, the whole trade
of the Punjab and of most of Afghánistán. No village can get on without the Khatri who
keeps the accounts, does the banking business, and buys and sells the grain. They seem,
too, to get on with the people better than most traders and usarers of this kind. In
Afghánistán, among a rough and alien people, the Khatris are as a rule confined to the
position of humble dealers, shop-keepers, and money-lenders; but in that capacity the
Patháns seem to look at them as a kind of valuable animal; and a Pathán will steal
another man's Khatri, not only for the sake of ransom, as is frequently done on the
Pesbáwar and Havára frontier, but also as be might steal a milch-cow, or as Jews might,
I dare say, be carried off in the Middle Ages with a view to render them profitable.
"I do not know the exact limits of Khatri occupation to the west, but certainly in all
Eastern Afghánistán they seem to be just as much a part of the established community as
they are in the Punjab. They find their way far into Central Asia, but the further they
get the inore depressed and humiliating is their position. In Turkistán, Vambery speaks
of them with great contempt, as yellow.faced Hindus of a cowardly and sneaking charac.
ter. Under Turcoman rule they could hardly be otherwise. They are the only Hindus
known in Central Asia. In the Punjab they are so numerons that they cannot all be rich
and mercantile; and many of them hold land, cultivate, take service, and follow various
avocations.
" The Khatris ara altogether excluded from Brahmin Kashmir. In the hills however
the Kakkas, on the east bank of the Jhelum, are said to have beeu originally Khatris
(they are a curiously handsome race), and in the interior of the Bangļa hills there is an
interesting race of fine patriarchal-looking shepherds called Gaddis, most of wbom are
Khatris. Khatri traders are numerous in Delhi; are found in Agra, Lucknow, and
Patna; and are well known in the Bara Bazar of Calcutta, though there they are princi-
pally connected with Punjab firms,



The Punjab Khatris.
507
" The Khatris do not secm, as a rule, to reach the westeru coast: in the Bombay
market I cannot find that they have any considerable place. In Sindh, however, I find
in Captain Burton's book an account of a race of pretended Kshatriyas who are really
Bánias of the Nánal Sháhi (Sikh) faith, and who trade, and have a large share of public
offices. These are evidently Khatris. Ludhiána is a large and thriving town of mercant.
ile Khatris."
Within the Punjab the distribution of the Khatri element is very
well marked. It hardly appears east of Luriliána, the eastern boundary
of the Sikh religion, nor does it penetrate into the eastern hills. It is
strongest in the central districts where Sikhism is most prevalent, and
in the Râwalpindi division and Hazára, and occupies a fairly important
position in the western Hill States. Although the Khatris are said
to trace their origin to Multán, they are far less prominent in the
southern districts of the Western Plains, and least of all on the actual
frontier ; but this would be explained if the Aroras be considered a
branch of the Khatris.
As Sir George Campbell remarked, it is curious that, intimately con-
nected as the Khatris always have been and still are with the Sikh
religion, only 9 per cent. of them should belong to it. Nor is it easy to
see why the proportion of Sikhs should double and treble in the Jhelum
and Ráwalpindi districts. But the social gradations of the Khatris,
based as they appear to be upon an immemorial tradition of former
greatness, hinder their acceptance of the stricter democratic doctrines
of the Sikh faith. A Khatri, when a Sikh, is ordinarily a Sikh of
Nának, rather than a devotee of Guru Govind, and he thus avoids the
necessity of completely abnegating his caste principles. The same
pride of birth has militated against the Rájput's acceptance of Sikh
teaching. The Khatris are probably numerous in Jhelum and Ráwal-
pindi because the Rájput element in the north-west Punjab has always
been weak, Some are Musalmán, chiefly in Multán and Jhang where
they are commonly known as KHOJAS ; these are said to belong chiefly
to the Kapúr section. The rest are Hindus.
The Khatris are essentially a trading caste, like the Aroſas and
Bháțias, comparatively few being engaged in agriculture, but they
stand higher than either of those castes, many of them being bankers,
and they are also largely employed in the civil administration. The
distribution of these castes is illustrated by the maps, I, II, and
IV facing pp. 303 and 308 in chapter Report of the Punjab Census
1901.
The Aroſas hold the south-west, as the Bánias do tho south-east, of
the Punjab, tracts in which the Khatris are hardly to be found. On
the other hand, the Bháția is found side by side with the Khatri in
Sialkot, Gujrát and Shahpur. The connection between these three
castes is obscure, and indeed it is doubtful whether the Bhátia has any
ethnological connection with the Khatri or Aroſa. The two castes
indeed appear to overlap, for in Jhang the Magu and Katiál sections
who deem themselves Khatris, but are regarded as Aroras by the
Lahoria Khatris, used it is said to give wives to the admitted Khatris
of the northern Chenawan country--on the upper reaches of the
Chenab-taking their wives from the Dakbanáda Aroſas further down
the Indus valley. And in Bahawalpur Khatris generally take Arora



508
...
Les
Khatri organization.
women as wives (but do not give daughters to Aroras), though whether
regular ritual parriages occur or not does not appear.
Organizatim.
The Khatris are divided into three main groups, viz. :-
I-Bári, II-Bunjahi, and ill-Sarin:--The Báris generally may
take wives froun the Banjáhis, but do not give them daughters in re-
turp. If a Bári family gives a daughter in marriage to a Bunjáni iti
loses status and becomes itself Bunjáhi. The exact position of the
Sarin is obscure. It is implied in more than one acconnt sent to me
that they are hypergamous, giving daughters to the Bunjáhis. In
Pațiála they used to intermarry with that group, but infrequently,
as euch alliances were not approved. In Poshá war the Sarín claim
that the Bunjáhis used to give them daughters, which is hardly possi-
błe, for it is admitted on all hands that they are below the Bunjábis in
statas, and in Delhi they cannot even smoke with the two higher
groupe. Praotically it may be said that they now form an endogamous
sub-caste; but there is one important exception, as will be noted
infra. Each of these three groups is further divided into sub-groups,
as described below:
Group 1 Bári.-- This group comprises 12 exogamous sections,
and its name is andoubtedly derived from búrah, 12.
These sections appear lo rank thus :-
Sootions -
Sub-groups (dhamas) :-
1. Kapúr.
2. Khapna.
3 Malhotra or Mahm or senior.
4. Kakar or Sotir.
5. Chopra
i. Dháighai.
6, Talwár.
ii. Chárghar.
Sahgal.
iii. Chheyhar.
8. Dhawan or Dhaun.
for junior.
iv. Báraghar or Bára-záti.
9. Wadhaun.
10. Tanpan.
11. Bobra or Wobra.
12. Maindharu.
-
90
w
-
:
This group seems to be very generally recognised and there is usual-
I no dispate as to the twelve sections comprised in it. But in Pindi.
aheb, Gandhoke, Bahi, Wahi and Soni are given instead of Nos. 9 and
above, so that the Bári there would appear to have 14 sections. .
The Bari group is apparently a close corporation into which no now
sections could be admitted, though a family of any of its 12 sections
may be degraded to a lower group. It contains four sub-gron ps based
on the status of the fawilies (not of tbe sections) in each. Thus the
families of the Dháig har sub-group are of the highest status and their
status depends on the fact that thoy can only give their daughters in
marriage in 'two and a half' (dhúi) sections. Similarly the Chárghar



The Bungáhí Khatris.
are below the Dháigbar in status because they can give & daughter in
marriage to four (chár) sections ; and so on.*
It follows from this that the families in each section are not all of the
same statue. For instance the Kapúr section is mostly of Dhaighar
status, but certain families having given daughters to the Sahgal
section have fallen to Báraghar status, i. e., to the status of those who
will give daughters to all twelve sections. Other families again have
even fallen to Bunjáhi status, by giving daughters in that group.
Group II—Bunjahi.t-This group comprises, theoretically, 52 sections,
as the name bawanjahi, from bawanja! 52,' would imply. The names
and numbers of the sections are however variously stated, and it is
clear that, all told, the number of sections in this group greatly exceeds
52. The sub-groups are variously given, but the typical grouping
would seem to be as follows :-
Sub-group i.-Khokhrán.--This group consisted of 8 sections origin-
ally, and hence it is also
known as Ath-zátia or
Thama.
Sections. • Gotra.
Ath-ghar, and these
sections are, in Ráwal-
Anand
Basinh
**
pindi, divided into four
Chandrbansi.
thamas as grouped in
the margin. Of these
Ohadha
Virbans.
Sahni
Surajbansi.
the first three form exo-
gamous divisions, in-
Suri
termarriage being for-
Sethi
1} Chandarbansi.
bidden between the two
Koli
sections in each thama
Sabarwal
because they belong to
the same Brahmanical
gotra. To these eight sections the Chandiok have been affiliated in
Pesháwar, and in Pațiála the Kannan section is said to belong to this
group.
The Khokharán were originally an offshoot of the Bunjális, and I
have therefore classed them in this group, but, though they are said in
one locality to still take wives from the other Bunjáhis, they are as a
rule endogamous and thus really form a sub-caste.
Bunjáhi khás or kalán.
Sub-group ic. The Asli, Pakka (or 'real') or Bári-Bunjáhi, I come .
prising 12 sections.
* This explanation is advanced tentatively: for a further discussion of the meaning of
these terms see the Appendix to this Chapter.
HA Jhang account says that the Bunjáhi consist of 9 sections only, viz. :---
'1 Ketaſ (? Katiál). | 3 Mehndru. 1 5 Wásan. 1 7 Chine.
2 Magun.
4 Dánd-dhuna. 16 Bhambri.
8 Dhil.
(The 9th is not known, nor can its parohit be found.) Those 9 sections are called phalı.
At marriages the boy's father bathes and then gives 5 rnpees per phali to the parohits of
the 9 sections. This ceremony is also called phali.
† The Bári.Bunjáhi must not be confused with tho Bari group above, The Bári.Bunjabi
are a sub-group of the Bunjáhi,



510
The Sarín Khatris.
Sub-group iii.-Baṣá or elder Bunjáhi, with 40 sections, called col-
lectively Dharmán or Dharmain.
Sub-group iv.-Chhoța or younger Bunjdii, with over 100 sections.
This sub-group is also called Ansar, or Sair, or Bunjáhi-khurd or-' ám.
Of the last three sub-groups the third used to give daughters to the
second. The relations of the fourth, the Chhota Bunjáhi, to the second
and third are not explicitly stated, but they also appear to be hyper-
gamous.
The conjecture may be hazarded that the peculiar Khatri organiza-
tion reflects in some way not at present traceable the old Kshatriya
division into Lunar and Solar families or dynasties. The division into
the Bára aud Baujahi groups is noticed in the Ain-i-Akbari* :-
“The Kshatriya (now called Khatris) form two races, the Surajbansi and Som.
bansi.
There are more than 500 tribes of these Kshatriyas, of whom
52 (Báwanjái) are pre.eminently distinguished and 12 (Báraghar) are of considerable im.
portance.
Some of their descendants, abandoning the profession of
arms, have taken to other occupations, and this class is known to the world by this name."
The Sarín would thus appear to be of later origin than Akbar's
time.
Group III.-Sarin. - This group comprises a large number of sections,
and the story goes that in 1216 A. D., the group was divided into 20
grades, each consisting of 6 sections, though, as a matter of fact, 123
sections are specified. At present there are two sub-groups :
Sub-group i.-Bara, or elder Sarín.
Sub-group ii.-Chhoța or junior Sarín.
The first sub-group comprises, according to one account, 10 sections
and according to another, 13,+ but of these 13 the last two are unable
to obtain wives from the other 11 sections, to which they give wives.
The Chhota Sarío, comprising 108 sections, used to give daughters to
tte Bara sub-group, but the two sub-groups are now said not to inter-
marry. Generally speaking, the Sarín sections are distinct from those
of the Bunjáhi and Bári groups, and it is unusual to find a section partly
Bunjáhi and partly Sarín.
Territorial groups. The territorial groups of the Khatrís render it
exceedingly difficult to give a clear account of their organization and
for this reason any allusion to them was excluded in the preceding para-
graph. They must, however, be described and as far as possible
explained, for they are constantly mentioned in the received accounts
of the caste and, what is more important, have a place in its organiza-
tion. They are indeed cross-divisions of the groups already described.
The most ancient territorial group appears to be the Uchhándi, or
Khatrís of the uplands, which may be taken to mean of the north-
west Punjab.' Other territorial groups are Multáni, which was of
high standing, Pesháwaria, and Bharochi (of Bhera in Shahpur). None
* Blochmann's Traps., III, p. 117.
† It would almost seem that the Sarîn attempted or are attempting to form a Bári
sub-group, with 12 sections at the top in imitation of the Bári Bunjabi.



Territorial groups.
511
of these seem to be endogamous. The Lahoria and Sirhindia* in-
termarry on equal terms, though the former possesses an exalted
status, so that “ Dháighar (Bári) Lahoria” denotes the fine fleur of
Khatri-ism.
In the Sialkot sub-montane there are two endogamous groups, the
Jhikli, 'of the plains,' and the Dugri, of the low hills,' and in both of
these the Bári and other social groups appear not to exist.
In the south-east of the Punjab thore are two groups, the Dilwálat
(of Delhi), and Agrawala, to which may be added a third, the Púrbia,
Gin the United Provinces). In the Agrawála the Bári group does not
appear to exist but there are Dháighar, Chárghar, Chhezáti and Kho-
kharán groups, and below them the Bunjáhi and Sarín groups, as in
the central districts of the Punjab. Of these the Sarín and Khokharán
are strictly endogan ous, but the others are hypergamous. The terri-
torial groups here are distinctly hypergamous, for the Agrawálas take
wives from the Púrbias and some Agrawála families take a pride in
giving daughters to the Sirhindia and Laboría groups; so too the
Dilwálás used to give daughters to other groups, especially to the
Agrawalás, though they are now said to be endogamous. These terri.
torial groups however appear to be somewhat nebulous in character,
for to the Khatrís of the United Provinces all the Khatrís of these
Provinces are · Punjabi,' and conversely to the Punjab Khatrís those
of the United Provinces are. Púrbia.'
* no conceito
* Lahoriá=' of Labore, and Sirhindia='of Sirhind,' i.e., of the country near Patiala.
otc. The two groups have nearly the same sections and intermarry on equal terms, but
they have different ceremonies at marriages. They are said, in an account of the Khatrís
written by Rai Bahadur Piáre Lál of Delhi, to be grouped thus:-
SEOTIONS.
1. Seth.
2. Mehra.
Of Dháighar and Chárghar status :- ...
3. Kapúr.
Khanna.
Bahl.
Dhaun,
Chopra.
ii. Chhezáti (i.e., of six sections)
| 8. Sahgal.
9. Talwar.
Puri.
r 1. Bahl.
2. Beri.
iii. Panjzáti (i.e., of five sections)
... ... 3. Sahgal.
ſ 4. Wáhi.
[ 5. Vij.
The sections are stated in the order given. It will be seen that Bahl and Sahgal occur
in the two latter groups while Beri is but an offshoot of Chopra. A Dháighar cannot give
his daughter to anyone but a Dháighar without losing status, and becoming Chárghar if
for example, he gives her to a Chárghar. But he may take a wife from a Chárghar or
Chhezáti or even from a Bunjáhi. Chárghar and Chhezáti may also take wives from the
Bunjáhi. The Panjzáti are said to be strictly endogamous. It will be observed that the
writer does not mention the Báris but that group is certainly found in Patiála and Lahore
† Dilwila (Delhi-wála) comprises :-
1. Seth.
3. Kapúr.
5. Kakkar.
2. Mehra.
4. Tandan.
6. Bohra.
But the last section cannot obtain wives from the first five.
L. Piáre Lál also notes that the Dilu ála have ceased to smoke with the other divisions
of the caste.



512
The sacred sections.
The sacred sections of the Khatris. There are four sacred sections
among the Khatris, whosh position must be touched upon. These are
the-
Bodi,* of the Dharmán-Bunjáhi or Chhota-Sarín sub.group..
Sodhi, of the Chhota Sarín sub-group.
Tihún or Trihún l of the Bará-Sarin sub-group.
Bhalla
These four sections became sanctified by the births of the various
Sikh Gurús to them. Thus the second Gurú, Angad, was a Trihún,
apd, strictly speaking, his descendants are styled Báwá-Trihúns : the
third Gurú, Amir Das, was a Bhalla and his descendants are, similarly,
Bá wá-Bhallas: but in each case the section, as a whole, appoars to have
acquired a sacred character by the birth of the Gurú within it, and it
is not merely his descendants who possess that character. Nevertheless
it is to be noticed that this inherited sanctity has not altered the social
status of these sections in the caste. The Sodhist remain Sarín, but
they intermarry with the Bedis, whose status is generally said to be
Bunjáhi. Further the Bedi have actually in á few cases violated the
rule of exogamy and permitted marriage within the got, it being ap-
parently held a less evil to break that rule than to give a daughter in
marriage to any but a member of a sacred-section.
Rules of marriage.-Generally speaking, the Khatris avoid the usual
four sections of gots, viz., those of the father, mother, father's mother
and mother's mother: but when the law of hypergamy narrows the
circle of alliances, this rule has to give way. Thus the Dháighar
families of the Kapúr, Khanna, Malhotra and Seth sections are not
bound by this rule, and avoid only the father's got and the near rela-
tions of the mother. Further, the rule forbidding intermarriage be-
tween the descendants of a common ancestor is not invariably observed,
for the first three of these sections are descended from three brothers,
yet their descendants are closely intermarried. The Khokharán again
avoid only the gots of the father and mother, because they have so few
sections to marry into. The Báris appear to avoid both the parents'
gots and the relations of their mothers within seven degroes, but no
general rule can be laid down.
A common Brahmanical gotra is also said to be, as a rule, & har to
intermarriage, but though the Khanna and Kapúr sections are both
of the Kaushal gotra, they intermarry. Thus we have the unexpected
result that the higher groups are the least bound by the ordinary rules
which probibit marriage within certain circles of relationship.
* The Nánakputra or children of Nának' appear to have been Bedis. In later Sikh times
they were employed as escorts to caravans whose safety was insured by their sacred descent,
Nánakputra is however also said to be a synonym for Udási. Prinsep gives the following:
aecount of the Bedis as traders in Siálkot:- Formerly a race of Bedis from Dera Babá
Nának were wont to bring large herds of cattle for sale at stated periods. The arrival of
these hers or droves were looked forward to with much interest. The Bedis divided the
Doábs out among themselves, and considered the villages their constituents, to whom long
eredit was purposely allowed in order that the extra charge in the bill, in honour of the
Gurú, might be overlooked, but they have given up coming regularly, and so the people are
driven to the Bár or to Amritsar fairs to purchase :' Sialkot Sett. Rep., 1865, $ 123.
+ The Sodhis of Anandpur are the descendants of Suraj Mal (not Surat Mal, as printed
in 10% of the Punjab Census Report, 1892), son of Guru Hargobind and are called the
bare mel ke Sidhi, as opposed to the chhote mel ze Sodhi or Mina Sodhis.



Khatri marriage.
513
The ages of betrothal and marriage. The age of the betrothal in the
case of the Khatrís depends on the status of the group. For example
in Rawalpindi, where the Khatris are proportionately "most numerous,
the age of betrothal varies. It is stated to be from 4-8 for girls
among the Khokbarán and Báris, and 8-10 among the Bunjáhis.
Marriage follows at 8-12 among the former and at 10-12 among the
latter. There is no mukláwa and married life commences at 13–15 in
all tlie groups. In Gurgaou the Khatrís, as a body, are said not to
practise infant marriage.
The traditional origin of the groups. The origin of the division into
the four groups called Bári, Bunjáhi, Sarín, and Khokhrán, is said to
be that Ala-ud-dín Khilji attempted to imposé widow-marriage upon
the Khatrís. The western Khatrís resolved to resist the innovation,
and sent a deputation of 52 (báwan) of their members to represent
their case at court; but the eastern Khatrís were afraid to sign the
memorial. They were therefore called followers of Shara Ayin or the
Muhammadan customshence Sarín-While the memorialists were
called Báwanjai from the number of the deputation or of the clans
respectively represented by the members of the deputation; hence
Bunjáhi. The Khokbrán section is said to consist of the descendants
of certain Khatrís who joined the Khokhars in rebellion, and with whom
the other Khatri families were afraid to intermurry; and the Bári
section, of the lineage of Mehr Chand, Kahn Chand, and Kapúr Chand,
three Khatrís who went to Delhi in attendance upon one of Akbar's
Rájput wives, and who, thus separated from the rest of the caste,
married only within each other's families. There are however otber
accounts, which vary in details, and of these the most circumstantial is
as follows:-When Alá-ud-din Khilji attempted to impose the custom
of widow rewarriage on the Khatrís, those of the caste who lived at
Delhi and Sirbind said they would abide by the decision of the Khatris
of Lahore, who in turn referred' the matter to the Khatrís of Multán.
It was thereupon determined to resist the Imperial edict, but the
Khatrís of the Bári Doáb, of Art and of Sirhind were afraid to adhere
to this resolve, and in consequence they formed the Sarín group. On
the other hand the 377 sections, called Uchandi, deputed 56 of their
number to-urge their cause at Delhi, and thus the remaining 321 sec-
lions became known as the Ansâr or supporters. Of the 56 sections
deputed to Delhi, 52 became the Bunjáhi-Kalán or Khas (or senior
Bunjáhi), and four became Dháighar. This latter sub-group was form-
ed of the three eponymous sections, Khanna, Kapúr and Mehra,
whose ancestors, at the instigation of their motber, had headed the re-
sistance to the imperial will. To these the Seth-Kakar were affiliated.
This explanation of the origin of the Dháigbar is hardly tenable
because these sections are by no means exclusively Dhaighar. The
legend does not attempt to explain the origin of the Bári group, or of
the Chárghar and other sub-groups. As to the term Sarín, the deriva-
tion from shará' 'ain (because they adopted the shará' or Muham-
madan Law), is often given, but the word is most probably a corruption
of sreni, a line, or a guild of traders. Sreni is, Sir H. Risley notes, a
common term for sub-caste in Bengal. It also recalls the word Srenika
the other name or title of Bimbisára : see p. 505 supra.



514
Khatri Kulinism.
The results of the Khatri social system. The general principle under
lying the Khatri organization appears to be perfectly clear, and is that
the higher (and therefore in the nature of things the narrower) the
circle within which a daughter may be given in marriage, the more
exalted is the social position of the family in its own group. This prin-
ciple fiuds full scope in the Bári group, within which the social status
of a family may constantly change, while the section, as a whole, has
po fixed status. In the two lower groups the sections appear to be
more definitely allotted, as it were, to the various groups. This how-
ever is a very obscure point and I need not pursue it further here. It
is sufficient to note that by pergamy leads to its usual results, though
owing to the general complexity of the Khatri organization and to its
endless local variations it is not possible to do more than state those
results generally.
In the first place there is competition, in the lower groups, for sons-
in-law, so that marriage expenses are as the author of the Tawáríkhoz-
Qaum Khatrián says, ruinous among the Sarín, very heavy among the
Bunjáhis, heavy among the Báraghars, and very slight among the
Dháighars.
But this was not the only result. In 1852 Sir Herbert Edwardes,
then Deputy Commissioner of Jullundur, described how the Lahoris*
used to make away with the girl-wives they obtained from the Bunjáhis
in order that they might obtain fresh brides and fresh dowries. The
Báris, as a whole, are to this day in the same position, and however
poor or distressed a Bári may be, he is sure of getting a wife with a
handsome dower from a respectable Bunjáhi family : (Patiala). If a
Bunjáhi wife died, when married to a Bári, it was callously said :-
ópurá na chula, ghi jadid,' or 'if the hearth be cold, the ghi is fresh,'
meaning that the dead wife could be easily replaced.
As might well be expected strenuous efforts bave from time to time
been made by the lower to shake off the social tyranny of the higher
groups and these have met with some measure of success. The man-
ceuvres of the various groups concerned are too complicated for de-
scription here, but it may be said that the results have been, in Gujrát,
to sever all connection between the Báris and the Bári-Bunjáhis, so that
the latter are now apparently endogamous, while in Pațiála and Jul.
lundur the object seems to be to make the Báris reciprocate by giving
wives to the Bunjáhis, and this object is said to have been attained.
Thus, generally speaking, the tendency is to revolt against the inequit-
able rule of hypergamy and transform the hypergamous groups into
endogamous sub-castes. The close resemblances in this system to the
institution known as Kulinish in Bengal need not be pointed out.
The Khatri got names.-Folk-etymology would derive Sarín from
surin,' warrior, but the derivation already given is more probable.
It is also said that Khukrán (Khokharán) is derived from Karakhan
descendants of Krukhak, 'one of the sons of Manu,' who settled and
reigned in the North West Punjab,
this da fresh brides obtained from the Laardes,
* Meaning, obviously, the Bári.Lahoria, especially the Dháigbar.



The Khatri sections.
515
The got names proper are popularly derived from various titles and
so on, and are cited as proofs of the ancient military character
of the caste. Thus Bhalla is derived from bhall, a spear. Bhasín from
bhas, brilliancy, and ien. master, i.e., the sun. Bohra from buha,
a column in military array, and it is said that in the United
Provinces a buha is still drawn and worshipped on the Dasebra day.
Dhawan, or Dhavan, is said to mean a messenger on the field of
battle. Kakkar is said to be originally Karkar, 'strong' or powerful';
and Kapúr to mean the moon, 'Karpur.' Khanna is even derived from
khan, a mine and said to mean sapper. But another account says it
means that · half' the family became Brahman. Kochar is said to come
from kavach, 'armour.' Mahendru is naturally derived from Mabendra,
'lord of the earth' or 'chief.' Mehra is also derived from Mihir,
the sun. The Sábi got declares that its ancestors were once bankers and
are styled Shahji. Sahni, Seni are both said to be corruptions of the
Sanskr. "Sainani,' the head of an army or general. Seth, reshta, ineans
rich and also a rájá. Tandan is also said to be an abbreviation of
martand and to mean the sun, but it is also said to mean warrior. A
kabit describes the relations of some of the gots thus:--
Bade Baderú, Púri, parán.-Kochar, Nandá bhu parwán,
Sonni, Mehtá, Hándá, Saigal,- Bhallá, Kholar, Dúgal, Upal,
Tinsau Búnjáhi, Zát Búnjahe- Nand.ghan, Bánďán barán bháe ;
Sikh-Bhunjáhi, Mol, Dharmán --Nátá Kare karo parwán.
" The Bade Bunjáhís are the highest, the Púrís are the like, the Kochars and Nandás sro
Rájás, the Sohni, etc. (the 12 tribes) and the 300 Bunjáhi tribes and the Nandghan are such
that there is no impediment to contracting marriages with them."
The Khatrís have not, as a caste, any distinctive caste customs, but
many of their sections have special usages on various occasions.
In Ambála the Khatrís celebrate a wife's first pregnancy by the
'custom' called rít. Her parents send her sweets, clothes and cash.
Sati is specially worshipped on this occasion, with other deities.
The Púrís of the Bunjáhi group ccok a mess of karhi, two and a
half mațs* full, on this occasion, and also worship a patri or small
board like a slate. The karhi, which is made of gram flour, is distri-
buted among the brotherhood.
In this section again on the birth of a son shira,t weighing about
11 mans kacha or some 40 lbs., is made and distributed among the
brotherhood. The family barber also make a goat out of it. Taking
a reed he splits it up into two or four pieces, bleating all the while
like a goat. For making this idol the barber gets 7 Mansúri pice as
his fee, and a rupee is also given to the family parohit.
The popular idea as to the origin of the devkáj is that once
Khatráni with a child in her arms met the Brahman Pars Rám and.
in her terror, fled, leaving the child behind her. A wild cat was about
to devour it when some kites appeared and spread their wings over
it. Now Rájá Kans, Krishna's maternal uncle, had been told by bis
astrologers that bis sister's eighth son would kill him, so when Krishna
was born he was replaced by a girl-child whom Rájá Kans killed.
She was dashed upon a washerman's board, but fell in the Himalayas
* Large earthen vessels.
† A kind of pudding, made of flour, sugar and a little ghi,



516
Special got customs.
where she is worshipped as Bhajan Bashni Devi,* and it is apparently
in commemoration of that event that the mother of a first-born son
among the Chopra, Kapúr, Kakkar, Khanne and Malhotra Khatrís
leaves her husband's house, after the child's birth, and takes refuge
in a relative's house, but not in her parents' home. Thence she is
brought back by her husband as if she were a bride, and a symbolical
remarriage takes place, but without the usual Vedic mantras being
read,
The Abrola section has a tradition that a snake was once born to
one of its members. One night it fell into a pot and next night died
from the blows of the churning-stick. So Abrolas never churn or
make butter and never kill & ser pent,
The Anand give no alms on & Sankrant, the first of a solar month.
Their women tabu ghi for the hair. The Nand appear to be the same
as the Anand.
The Bahl will not remain in Delhi at night. They may visit it in
the day time but must leave it before dark.
The Bejal Seths, a section of the Dilwali (of Delhi) Khatrís observe
the following usage at a tonşure. The rite is always performed at the
door of the house, and when the family barber prepares to shear the
child's hair, two persons disguised as Mughals, one having a bów
and arrow in his hand, and the other a.shoe, stand close to him. They
remain in this posture until the shearing of the child is over. The
child then enters the house, and the females of the family, when they
see him with his hair shorn, begin to beat their breasts and cry hai !
hai ! morá kin munda, Şethon jaya kin nunda : “Woe! woe! who
shaved my son, who shaved the son of a Seth ?” They regard, or
pretend to regard, that day as an nalucky one, and observe & kind of
pretended mourning for the next 24 hours. The daily food is not cooked
on that day, and even the lamps of the house are lighted, not by the
members of the family, but by a neighbour. Curious and laughable as
this ceremony may appear to be, it has not sprung up without a cause.
It has its origin in the following story :-
Once upon a time the son of a poor Seth had on account of the poverty of his parents
passed the prescribed age of tonsure, and having been not properly looked after, was
suffering from lice which had grown in abundance over his head. He was one day seen on
the road, weeping and crying bitterly from the pain they occasioned him, by two Mughals,
who felt such compassion for him that, having by chance met a barber, they ordered him to
cut off the child's hair then and there. The barber knowing that the object of their com.
passion was a Khatri's son who could not be shorn without the formal ceremony, refused to
comply with their demand. The Mughals seeing that he was obstinate in his refusal
resolved to use force : one of them beat him with his shoes and the other pointing his arrow
threatened him with instant death if he failed to shave the child on the spot. The terrified
barber had no alternative left but to cut the child's hair without further loss of time.
When this had been done, the Mughals let the barber go and told the child to go his way
home. The child accordingly returned to his house with his bair thus shorn. The females of
the family were shocked at the child's appearance, and thought this unceremonious shearing
of his hair very unlucky. They all began to beat their breasts and burst into lamentation.
It was a day of regular mourning for the whole family.t
* In the Central Punjab this girl-child is supposed to have become the lightning and
during a thunderstorm the maternal uncle and nephew will not sit or stand or sleep in the
same room.
+ From N. I. N. Q, IIT, $ 447,



Khatris, Beri-Bhandári.
517
The Beri are an offshoot of the Chopra and ascribe their name to the
fact that their ancestor was born under a beri tree.
Among the Bhadwár the ceremony of putting on the sacred thread for
the first tiine is thus observed :- When the boy is of an age to don
thie janeo his father, with his brotherhood and a band of musicians,
goes on one day to the sweeper's house to invite a black bitch to the
feast at the ceremony ; next day, the family priest (parohit) brings
the black bitch together with the sweeper to his master's house. The
parohit performs & certain ceremony of worship to the bitch. Then
all the different dishes cooked for the ceremony are put in a large
brass dish, and placed before the bitch, and the members of the family
fold their hands before her and so continue until she eats something
from the dish. They will even wait sitting till the evening, if she does
not touch the food. After the bitch has eaten, the remains and a red
cloth are given to the sweeper. After that Brahmans are feasted,
and then the members of the family may eat. The origin of this rite
is said to be that the Bhadwárs once lived towards Delhi and when the
Muhammadan rulers tried to convert them to that faith they fled from
that tract but many were murdered. One of their women who was far
advanced in pregnancy gave birth to a male child and abandoned it,
she herself escaping. The child was however carried away by a black
bitch and suckled by her, so when he grew up he directed his descend.
ants to adore the black bitch for ever.
Bhalla, Bahl, Aanda, Sial, and Sabbarwal Khatrís. - The bhaddan
ceremony is performed by Siáls, Bahls and Bhallas, at the age of five
in the Kángra hills, by Hándas at Rám Tirth near Amritsar- and by
Sabbarwals at their houses after 13 days of the birth of a child.
Among the Bhandarís at the birth of a child the mother is made to
sleep on the ground. Seven thorns of a kíkar or jandi tree are buried
in the earth under her pillow. Bread or anything made of corn is
avoided for the first three days, only milk being given her for food.
On the fourth day chúrma (a mixture of flour, ghi and sugar) is
prepared and given her to eat and what she cannot eat is buried under
her bed. On the 13th day she puts on a barber's shoes, leaves her
room and resumes to her household duties. No cause is assigned for
the burping of the thorns. At the bhadan munan ceremony a jandi
tree is cut and à kite feasted. The mother affects displeasure and
goes to a neighbour's house, but is brought back by her husband who
gives her some ornament or cash.
The boy becomes a Sanyási, or recluse, and begs alms of his brother.
hood. Out of the alms, which generally comprise flour, chúrma is
made and offered by the boy to his Brahman gurú, and then distributed
amongst all the brotherhood, ..
Among the Bbandarís the janeo is generally performed at 8 or 9
years of age. On the evening before, the family parohit invites a kite
to the feast next morning. Before the rite begins bread, khír, etc..
are sent to the kite, then Brahmans are feasted, and lastly the brother-
hood. Then the boy is shaved, the family parohit shaving first one:
lock of hair and receiving Rs. 5-4 as his fee, the remainder being shaved
by the barber. The janeo is put on after the boy has bathed and he



518
Khatris, Bhagre-Chadda.
her back. Her father and the binding his" mortis occasion. to who,
then cuts a branch of a jandi tree. After him his mother, whom her
husband kicks, goes away displeased (ruskar), to her parents who,
if not residents of the same place, visit it on this occasion. On his
return from cutting the jandi, finding his mother gone, the boy,
together with his father and the brotherhood go to appease and fetch
'her back. Her husband (the boy's father) pacifies her and brings her
back home. Sometimes she is given an ornament or some other thing
to conciliate her.
This custom also prevails among the Mokol and other Bunjáhi
Khatrís
The Bhandaris, like the Hándas, affect Shaikh Farid who once met
a company of them in a wilderness. They entertained him and in
return he said : tumhará bhandará bhará rahe, May your store-house
remain full.' Thenceforth they were called Bhaudári. They have
three sub-sections, tha Ber-pálni; so called because an orplan was
brought up by his sister (ber-bahin), the Pátni, from Pákpattan, and
the Bhoria, so called because its founder was brought up in an
underground room, (bhora-tah-khána). Weddings are celebrated by
a visit to Baţála, in Gurdás pur, as that town is regarded as their
original settlement.
The Bhagre do not worship a chil but the ak, for, they say, this plant
saved the life of Bábá Mumáli, one of their progenitors, by feeding him
with its juice, when as a new born baby, he was thrown away by his
mother, who was fleeing for her life. A Ját maid servant known as
Bharwain Mátá, who had accompanied the mother in her flight, rescued
the child some 20 days after its abandonment, and she is commemorated
at weddings when 21 Ját females (2 adults and a girl) are fed. The
Bhagre perform the bhaddan in the Kángra Hills, and ancestor worship
at Burj Lattan in Jagraon tahsil, Ludhiana, on 15th Katak. They came
originally from Sirsa. The name Bhagar means corn of very inferior
quality, and was given them by a Bhát, because he got corn of that
quality from one of their ancestors, who was distributing grain during
a famine, the truth being that the Bhát only came when the good grain
was all gone and nothing but bhagar remained.
The Bhalla in Hoshiarpur always have a sweeper present at a wed-
ding because a sweeper protected their female ancestor during Pars
Rám's persecution.
The Bhuchar got is said to have been originally Talwár. One of
that got left a son without any one to protect it, but a buffalo and a
kite took care of it. His mother, who had abandoned him owing
to her poverty, found him again and called him 'Bhuchar,' as he was
well-fed and developed. This godfeeds kites at weddings and it has
also preserved the buffalo's horns, one being kept by the Bhuchars of
Delhi and the other by those of Nawashabr in Jullundur.
The Chadda hold the ak sacred, because they say, their forefathers
once fougbt with Babar near Eminábád and all fell, save one who hid
under an ak bush. He refounded the section and it still performs the
munnan at Emipábád and worships the ak.



Khatris, Cham-Dhand.
519
The Cham, a got of Bunjáhi status, were really Tanpan Kapúrs, but
one of their ancestors accepted a cham (skin) from a Chamár in pay-
ment of monies due to him, whence the name. Followers of Gurú
Rám Rai, the Cham, have satis at Tungaheri in Ludhiana tahsil and at
Kíratpur in Ambala. They perform the bhaddan like a wedding in
most respects, hut they do not worship the chil or ak. One peculiarity
in connection with the rite is that all the food for it is cooked on a fire
produced by rubbing two pieces of pláh wood together. The fire must
also be kindled by members of the family only and until it is made food
or drink is avoided. A parohit may join in the ceremony, but no one
else can take part in it. The boy too becomes a Sanyási, but is brought
back home by his sisters.
The Chhotra got is an offshoot of the Dhírs, and worships a serpent
and a Muhammadan mirási because once a serpent fed Bábá Malla,
their ancestor, with its tail, and a mirási taking him from the reptile
nursed him, when he had been abandoned as a child by his mother
who was fleeing for her life. Chhotra is derived from chhútná to leave,
and the section has a sati at Amargarh, in Pațiála, where there is an
image of a serpent also.
The Chhúra Khatrís still commemorate Bhái Lálú, whose shrine is
situate at Dalla in Kapúrthala, by an annual fair. By repeating his
name or legend intermittent fever is cured. His grandson, Salamat
Rai, was importuned by Maharaja Ranjit Singh to pray for his recovery
from a mortal sickness. This the Bábá refused to do, but he gave three
years of his own life to prolong that of his master, and in gratitude
Ranjit Singh spent a crore of rupees on the golden temples at Benares,
Amritsar, Hardwar and Jawalamukhi.
The Chopra are also called Chopra Rajáva, Jat(?) and Qánúngo
Chopra. They claim descent from one Chaupat Rái. Once, they say.
they lived at Benares, but incurring the wrath of Chandragupta went
to the Deccan, where Chaupat Rai, their ancestor, was slain in battle
by Sultan Mahmúd. The Chopra are named after him, but are really
Surajbansi.
The Chopra and Kakkar perform a son's bhaddan ceremony in his
5th year. On this occasiou the boy's father goes away, and the mother
too goes ruske (being displeased) to the house of a relation. Then
the boy's father, with some of his relatives, follows her there. They first
kick her slightly and then appease her and bring her back home after
tying her garment to her husband's chádar or dupatta.
The Chopras give from Re. I to Rs. 31 (at most) in cash as the
bride's dowry at her marriage. At a girl's marriage her mother also
asks alms for her of the women of the got; and at a son's wedding be is
given a plough. The Chopras do not use khand but gur only at
weddings.
The Dhand oot performs the jandi rite about 2 years after the birth
of a son. Three top-knots are left on the child's head and until the
bhaddan is observed no razor may be applied to it, nor may the boy
weapa shirt. The bhaddan is celebrated with much éclat. many pites
similar to those observed at weddings being performed.



520
Khatris, Dhir-Jhanjë.
The Dhír, or brave,' section has a tradition that it once migrated
from Ajudhia and settled at Kandahár. Expelled thence by the Arab
invasions it came to the Punjab. The Dhír of Kapurthala are descend-
ed from Bábá Mahya, who was the gurú of Guru Amar Dás, and is still
reverenced at Dhír weddings.
The Dhír, in Ludhiana, feast a woman of the Sindhu Ját tribe on the
birth of a son, because in a fight with dacoits, a Dhír fought on even
after he had lost his head. A Sindhu girl who saw his valour was
rebuked for standing there to watch the fight and tauntingly asked if it
was her husband's head that she must look at it. She retorted that it
was indeed her husband's, and thereupon she became sati. So Dhír
Khatrís commemorate her to this day.
The Duggal at the maunan don a trági (a waist band to which a strip
of cloth is fastened and carried between the legs) of munj. The strip
of clotlı must be red and the pagré too must be of that colour. The boy
must also wear wooden sandals and carry a fakir's wallet (baglí). He
cries Alakh (the mendicant's cry) and his kinswomen give him alms.
He then runs away, pretending to be displeased, but his sister or
brother's wife or father goes after him to conciliate him and gives him
soirething. The rite is performed outside the village. A goat is killed
and a drop of its blood applied to the boy's forehead. The flesh is
cooked and eaten on the spot and what remains is buried there. Till
the maunan is performed at the age of 5, 7, or 9, the boy's head must
not be shaved with a razor, but his hair may be cut with scissors.
The Gundis are a section of the Khatrís found in Gujrát and said to
he the only community of the caste found in that District. They say
that the emperor Bahlol brought them from Sialkot and established
them at Bahlolpur in Gujrát. They are agriculturists and think that to
relapse into trade would be derogatory.
The Handa perform the maunan at Pákpattan, alleging that Shaikh
Farid-ud-dín Shakarganj is their patron. North of Lahore the Hánda
resort to a tank near Gujrat town to perform the maunan, carrying
the youngsters about to undergo it in procession with drums and music.
A brick from Shaikh Farid's shrine has been thrown into the tank there
and so made it sacred. The Hándas will not eat animals slaughtered
by jhatká (strikii g off the bead at a blow) after the Hindu fashion, but
cut their throats like the Musalmáns. A Hánda bridegroom bas &
piece of red silk, weighing 11 tolâ (half ounce), tied to the strings of his
chapkan (coat), and when he reaches the bride's house he opens it and
puts it before his mouth with the right hand like a handkerchiet.
Among the Jaidke at the bhaddan the boy becomes' a Sanyási and
is brought home by his sisters.
The Jerath or Jaret also venerate the kite (chil) because it saved the
life of their progenitor.
The Jhapji section has a peculiar observance called thengna (lit. a
tiresome child). Tbe sweeper of the bride's parents makes å male
figure of wood, with clothes, and dances it before the bridegroom's
party, who give him a rupee. Halvá is tbrown to the kites when the
bride reaches her husband's house, and after the wedding the party
goes to worship the gods.
ely comm Wahiol broughthey are agrict



Khatrés, Jiwara-Khanna
521
The Jíwar are Sikhs and Murgái* Khatrís by origin. One of the
Murgáis called Bábá Dari (Dari Chak in Amritsar is called after him),
was a Sikh of Gurú Nának. He had a son named Mának Chand, who
came to Gondwal where his father-in-laws were and being a Sikh of the
Gurús, went to the third Gurú, Amar Dás, who lived at Gondwál.
The Gurú bade him break the bed of the Mauli Sahib. A báoli or
tank had been dug at Gondwál, but owing to the hard clay, the water
level conld not be reached, and so Mának Chand was ordered to break
through the level clay while others were busy in the excavation.
Through his exertions the water was reached but he himself was drown-
ed and for full three days no trace was found of his body. On the
third day his mother-in-law went to complain to the third Gurú, and
he came to the spot and called "Mának Chand, whereupon his body
swam out of the water. The Gurú touched it with his feet and Mának
Chand came to life again. So the Gurú bade that his descendants
should be called Jíwar (from jina which means living) and none are
now called Murgái.
The Kaura, a got of Bunjáhi status, are really Kapurs. The name
means 'bitter' and is thus explained: A woman far advanced in
pregnancy became' sati and her child was born near an ak plapt. It
was found on the third day after its birth sucking the tail of a serpent,
wbile a kite shadowed it with its wings. As the ak is a bitter plant
and the kite (chil) is considered poisonous the boy was called Kauſa..
And when a twig is cut from a jandi tree, a rite performed at weddings,
a chil is feasted and food placed near a serpent's hole and also near an
ak, round which a thread too is wound when a child is teething, its
head is shaved clean only four top-knots being left. A confection
(halwa) cooked on a fire that is produced from stones, is then distri.
buted to the brotherhood, a he-goat made of halwá having been provi.
ously slaughtered. The Kauſa are followers of Gurú Rám Das, at
whose shrine the bhaddan is performed and all the top-knots are then
shaved clean off.
The Khanna Khatrís take their sons for the ceremony of maunan, or
first head-shaving, to Dipalpur, tahsil Chunián, in Lahore, owing to a
belief founded on the following legend :-A Brahman, named Laha, was
childless and went into the bár, or wilds of Lahore, to practise augteri-
ties, which he performed with such success as to draw upon him the
favour of Chandika (Durga), the patron goddess of the clan, who
granted him a son; but as he was too old to beget one, she gave him
one ready grown up called Lasráj,t on condition that no abusive epithet
was to be applied to him. Like all spoilt children he was wayward and
fretful, and his adoptive mother, forgetting the warning, one day said
to him : Tu niggar já, "sink into the earth,” because he would not
heed her call from the door to come into the house. He immediately
sank into the earth, and the old woman was only just able to save him
* Murgái doubtless means 'teal.'
† A variant from Kapúrthala makes the goddess Xihangláj (? Hinglaj), and says the
boy's name was a Lálú Jasrái. Once he was sent to the bazar for turmeric but dawdled
over the errand. When his step-mother scolded him he sank into the earth and the
Brahman in vain invoked the goddess, who declared that what had been could not be
undone, but promised that the shrine of Bára Lálú Jasrái shquld te worsbipped by the
Khannas throughout all ages,
:
unded cent into the orith suine patronto Beget hat no abwayward and



522
Khatris, Kapúr-Mehndru.
by his top-knot. And so Khanna boys to this day never wear a
top-knot.
The Kapur, Malhotra, and Seth Khatris may perform the maunan
ceremony anywhere, provided there is no river or well containing water
from Dipálpur.
At a son's bhaddan among the Khosla* (Sarín) the parohit goes on
the previous evening to invite an eagle to the feast. Next morning
before the shaving is begun, four loaves, a small quantity of confection-
ery (síra halwá) and two pice are put on the house for the eagle. When
these things have been taken away by an eagle the ceremony may be
performed. The eagle is feasted in the same manner at weddings
soon after the bride comes to her father-in-law's house for the first
time.
The Kochhar claim to be an offshoot of the Seth and say their founder
was left an orphan, his father having been slain in battle. He was
brought up by his sister and their name is derived from kochhar, 'lap'
The Kochhart have an interesting custom connected with a bride's first
pregnancy. Six months after her preguancy she deliberately feigns
displeasure with the members of the family and goes to some other
house. The bridegroom on hearing of her departure goes in search of
her, after having his head, moustaches and beard clean shaved.
When he finds out where she is, he collects a few of his brotherhood
and goes to the place where she is staying. After many entreaties
be promises to give her an ornament, and then takes her back to his
own house.
The Koli or Kohli got whose original home was at Jamsher, a village
in Jullundur, worship the kite at the bhaddan rite. They enchew the
use of dry cotton plants as fuel because a spake once got mised
op with them and was burnt to ashes.
The Likhí got performs the bhaddan in the Kangsa Ilills and ancestor
worship at a sati in Dhaipai, Ludhiana tabsíl. They cut a janda
tree and worship a chíl in the usual way.
· Among the Mehndru-a section of the Bárbi-and the Ghands-
section of the Bunjáhi-the head of the boy who is to don the lange
is shaved quite clean with a razor, and he is then disguised 'asa
faqir with a munj rope (trági) round his loins, wooden shoes (Kharán.
wán, on his feet, a wooden pháori in his hand, a deerskin under his arm.
a janeo made of munj rope, one jholi or wallot in his right hand and
another under his left arın, and goes round begging alms of his asserabled
kinsmen and friends. Whatever he gets in his first jholi he gives to his
qurú, who gives him the janeo and whispers the prescribed mantra in
his ear. This rite is called the gurú mantar dená or sanskar dená
The contents of the second jholi he gives to his parohit. Worship
on this occasion is not restricted to any particular deity.
mi Folk-etymology, of course, derives the name of this section from khosná, to rob. Cf. the
Khosa Játs and Baloch.
† A Kochhar husband shaves his head and face. clean-as Hindus do on a father's
death-when his wife conceives for the first time.-(Sialkot.)



The Malhotra Khatrís.
523
The Mehndra perform the jandián rite, when a child has reached
the age of 3, 4 or 5, at a pond called Suniáránwála. The kinsmen go
there in the morning, the father's priest carrying on his head a
brass tray full of khír. The priest walks round the pond until a chil has
taken away some of the khír, and if no chil appears for two or eve3
three days none of the family will eat or drink. When it has taken some
of the khir the father is congratulated. A he-goat is also taken to the
tank and, if no chil appear, it is slaughtered at sunset. When the
chil takes away some of its flesh the father is congratulated. Blood
is then taken from the goat's ear and a tíka made on the boy's
forehead with it. The goat's head and feet are sent by a barber to the
kinsmen and the flesh and khír that remain are distributed to the
brotherhood. Once, it is said, the got was all but extinct, all the
inales having died of a plague. But a pregnant woman fled from
Bhera or Khushab (the family is still called Bherú or Khushábí) to her
father's house, the family parohit accompanying her. On the way
she gave birth to a son, and the parohit coming to know of the event
after they had gone some distance returned and found the boy still alive
and shadowed by # chíl with its feathers. The parohit restored him to
his mother assuring her that his family would attain greatness. This is
how chíl worship arose in this family.
The Malhotra got observes the deokáj in the 5th year after the
birth of the first child, and no Malhotra can marry his eldest son or
daughter until it has been solemnized.
Both at a true wedding and at a deokáj the chil or kite is worshipped
because, it is said, one of those birds ouce burat itself alive in the
chitá or pyre in which a Malhotra widow was being burnt with her
husband. So the got regards the kite as itself a sati and is worshipped
as such.
At a wedding when the marriage party reaches the bride's house a
goat is demanded from her parents and its ear cut with a knife, a
drop of the blood being dabbed on the bridegroom's forehead.
The Sirhindia Malhotrás take boys to Dandráta in Pațiála for the
mundan rite, as their gurú lived there, and after the boy's head has
been shaved his representative gives the child a jhunjhuná with a
knot at each end for the first time. No Malhotra will give his son
such a toy till this has been done, though he may give him one with
a single knot. There too the guru's quilt (gudri) is worsbipped and
jhandúlás or bachelor Brabmans are fed.
A Malhotra wife in the seventh month of her first pregnancy sits in
the dehli or portico of the house and there removes her nosering and
laung which she never puts on again. She also gives up dyeing her
hands and feet with henna, saying thrice-
Nak nath láhi, sar matti pái, asi láhi láhi.
Main láhun, meri bahu láhe, meri sat kuli láhe.
“ I take off my nosering, throw earth on my head. As I have takuu
it off so may my son's bride take her's off, and seven generations of
my children take it off”,



524
Khatris, Mengi-Najjar.
The Mengi also do not kill the snake. It was, they say, born to
one of their ancestors and at the shaving (maunan) rite they worship
a picture of it. At this ceremony they slice off of a goat's ear and
apply smoke to its nose to make it sneeze. They consider that no good
luck will come unless the goat sneezes. A
The Merwáha claim Central Asian origin, and say they came from
Merv (Marusthal). They belong to the Sarin group, and say they
entered the south-west Punjab through the Bolán Pass. Their ;
earliest traceable settlement is, however, at Govindwál or Gondwal,
in Amritsar, which they say was made into a large place by one Bábá
Govind Rái, a devotee. This man was granted lands in jágír for giving
food to a Musalman kiug, who came to him hungry during a hunting
expedition. Afterwards one Gurú Bhala, with whom the Merwáhas
had quarrelled, cursed them for refusing to allow his followers to drink
from the same well. Thereupon large numbers of them settled else-
where.
The Merwáha perform their maunan ceremony at the shrine of Bábá
Thaman, at Rámría, 16 miles west of Jhang, and at Kángra.
The Mithu are goldsmiths. They have a sati at Talwandi Nímí, in
Jagraon tahsil, in Ludniána. One of the family, on his way from his
facher-in-law's house, with his wife, was killed by a tiger. She became
sati with him and so the place is visited, every year in Bhádon, and
səven times mud is taken out of a pond near by in the neighbourhood
of Talwandi Nímí.
Among the Mokol Bunjáhí when the janeo rite is performed for the
first time (generally between 8 and 10 years of age), is a goat slaughtered
(halál karná) by a Qázi, and the parohit of the family applies (tika
lagáná) a drop of its blood to the forehead of the boy who is to don
the janeo.* The goat's flesh is then eaten by the brotherhood ; but
they must eat it indoors and no one is allowed to take it outside. Before
the ceremony is performed the boy is shaved with scissors, and not
with a razor. At a wedding when the party starts towards the bride's
village, the bridegroom is required to cut a branch of a janą tree
in his own village, females of the brotherhood accompanying him; and
he must not return to his own house but go straight to his father-in-
law's village with the wedding party.
Among the Najjar warí tukná is prohibited. Warís are made of pulse
(mungi or másh). The pulse is steeped in water for a whole night.
Then it is ground fine on a stone with a stone or stick, water being
sprinkled on it when it begins to dry. It is called pithi (from písna to
grind). Spices are then mixed with it, and small cakes made of it by
hand and spread out on a charpai, while they are wet, and allowed to
dry in the sup; when dried they are kept and cooked as vegetables
from time to time. This process is called wari țukna.
The Najjar trace their origin to Uch in Baháwalpur.
The Nandat worship the ak which must not be touched by the women
of the section, or mentioned by them : they worship it once a year.
a stone od pithi (frome of it by
* Mokol Khatrís call in the Mullah at the janeo dálná, as Mullahs in old times taught
their children-(Siálkot).
The name Nanda or Nenda is derived from niñán, husband's sister,



Khatris, Nanda-Saonchi.
525
Amongst the Pasi at a maunan and a marriage the eagle is worshipped
in this wise. On the day before the date fixed for the munan or the
wedding, the family priest invites an eagle to a feast on the following
morning. Next day, the boy or the girl's father, together with the parohit,
goes out taking with him four loaves and a confection (karáh
parshád) thereon and puts it before the eagle. Standing barefooted
with folded hands before her, they beg her to eat the meal (bhojan).
They must stand in the same position until the eagle takes away part
of it.
They then come back and perform the marriage or maunan ceremony
and feast Brahmans. !
The Púrís are sub-divided into three sub-sections, the Sidh Gbarmals
of the Bist Doáb, the Malik Wazírí of Lahore and Gujranwala and
the Kasúrı of Lahore, Dharmkot and the Málwa. Bábá Sidh Gharmal
was a saint who originally came from the Málwa. At a wedding in
this got the bride's mother feigns anger and seeks refuge in a
kinsman's house, until her husband soothes her displeasure and she is
brought back amid the songs of the girls of the kindred. In some
Púrí families a mother never drinks milk after the birth of a child.
Others cut off a goat's ear with a sword at a birth, stain the child's
forehead with its blood, and then kill and eat the goat at a feast of all
the brotherhood.
The Rihán, a got of Bunjáhi status, perform bhaddan at Nangal, in
tahsil Nakodar in Jullundur, after catting a jandi twig, wbich is
worshipped on the Janamashtmi day. A he-goat, whose ear has been
previously pierced near the jandi is taken home and beheaded by the
eldest male of the family with an iron weapon. The flesh is distributed
to the brotherhood and the bones and blood buried in the house-yard.
On Sundays Brahmans are not allowed to see or use milk and curds in
a Rıhán's house. The following tale is told of the origin of this cus-
tom :-During the Muhammadan period all the women of the section,
and the wife of their parohit determined to save their honour by throw-
ing themselves into a well, but the parohitnis heart failed her, so the
other women called her a Chandální and thus milk and cards, the best
of earthly things, have been prohibited to their Brahmaps on Sundays
ever since. The tarági rite, which consists in putting a thread round
the loins, is observed at a high mound, said to be the ruins of a village,
near Ghalib Kalán, in Jagraon tahsil, in Ludhiána. The Sirire Khatrís
of Delbi also visit this mound and offer a cloth, etc., there after a wed-
ding, as it was their original home and was called Keráſíwála.
The Saonchi section of the Bunjáhis has a curious rite on the Sth
sudi of A sauj The arms of every male, even a new-born boy, are both
incised with razors until blood oozes from the cuts. Kúnga, a red
powder, is then sprinkled on them by way of worship, and the blood is
Gabbed on the forehead. An idol shaped like a headless man is also
made and a knife placed near its right hand. It is then worshipped.
Nothing but bread and milk may be eaten on this day.
The Softi got has a sati at Rattowál, a village in Ludhiana. They
wame originally from Lahore. At a tank called Bábá Hansuá ná named
after one of their ancestors, children who are supposed to be under evil
and way.



526
The Softh Khatris.
influences and so grow thin are bathed and cured completely. Corn
is vowed on recovery.
The Soi perform the bhaddan in the Kangra Hills, and that of cutting
the jandi tiee at their own villages. They worship their ancestors at
Jangpur in Ludbiána tabsil at the Diwali
The Tali got is so named because its founder was being carried away
by a torrent when he caught hold of a tula, a small toy made of grass
or reeds and shaped like a boat, in which lamps are put. By its aid he
was saved and so was called Tuli.
Uppal is said to meanstone,' and this got performs the bhaddan rite
whenever its gurus from Anandpur, in Hoshi.rpur, visit them. Each
guru gets 14 rupees and gives tin return a small pagri. A few days
after a child's birth, its mother takes it to a sati's place outside the
village and then to the tomb of Báwá Lál, whom Muhammadans call
Shah Kamál. Offerings of bagar (pounded rice) are made at both
places. The child's head is shaved at the first place and a shirt and
some orpaments put on at the second.
The Wadhera roake offerings of luchís at the shrine of Bábá Tomba,
when a hoy at the age of 11 years dons & shirt for the first time, and
regard it as a good omen if kites take the offerings : when a boy first
dons shoes, at the age of 6, the ear of a he-goat is cut and water
sprinkled on the animal; if the goat shivers it is auspicious. In either
case the spirits of deceased ancestors are supposed to be propitiated.
At 11 a boy's head is shaved and he declares that he must forsake his
home and study in the forests, but his sisters bring him back, and, in
the case of the eldest 800, the mother leaves her home, going to a re-
lative's house, and there she remains until her husband comes with a
wedding procession and marries her again.
KHATTAK (KHATAK).--A tribe of Pathans which claims descent from Luq-
man alias Khatak, one of the sons of Kodai. The Khataks, as related
in the article on Patháns, claim themselves to be Patháns of the Kar-
Járni branch. By his Urmar wife Karlárnai had two sons Kodai and
Kakai. The foriner had six or seven sons, including Luqmán, and a
daughter who married a Sayyid Muhammad, and had by him two
sons, Honai* and Wardag whom Karlárni adopted.
The story goes that Luqmád, while out hunting with his brothers,
met four Afghán damsels of another tribe. Luqmán chose the best-
dressed-but she was the worst-favoured, being plain, dark and
stout. His brothers scoffed at him, saying Luqmán pah khatai lár,
* Luqmán is in the mud,' whence he was nick-named Khatak. His bride,
however, bore him two sons Tormánt and Boláq. Tormán had two sons
Tarai and Tarakai, but as the former was the abler, his descendants and
those of Tarakai too are styled Taris. Hence the Khataks are divided
into main branches, Tarí aud Boláq- and to the latter belongs the
Bangi Khel, descendants of Bangai, son of Sághari, son of Boláq.
im, sayinred, being a p. chose to others,
hindi naging.name dokhin hand towels and
-
* Honis, descendants of Honai, were to be found round Niláb dwelling among the
Khataks two centuries ago. The Káka Khel are much venerated by the Khataks as
descended from the Sayyid Muhammad, and are probably Honis. The shrine of the Káká
Subib belongs to this family, of which Shaikh Rabím-Yár was a member.
† The namo rominds us of Toramána.



GENEALOGICAL TREE OF THE KHATAKS.
Karlan.
Kodái.
Kakai.
Bodki
Burhán. * Wrakzai.
Utmán.
Usman.
Jadrán. Luqmán alias Khatak. Khugiáni.|| Sulaimán. Shitak. **
Wazír. 4
Turmán.
Bolaq.
Tarai.
Tarkai. T
Nandrak.
Marwat.
Saghir.ttt.
Barkwit.
Amír.||!1
Anu.
Mirai.$$
Taráh. Bhangi. Makori. Darløppi.
Mahmúd, Khawájé. Attá. Acho. Ghor. Mámún.
Daita. Seni.
Battai.
Mahmandia.
Watar. Khurram. ***
Darish.
Yásín.
Districts.
Hati. Zanai.fi
Darmalak. Mandúni. Khurram. Mashak.
Daulat Khawájá. Barák.
Fatteh. Sheikhali. Mashirai. *. The descendants of Burhán are called Dilazaks and those of Wrakzai Orakzais; both these tribes reside in Tíráb
and the adjacent countries.
Hahssan.
+ The descendants of Utmán, known as Utmán Khels reside in Swát, Bajour, Yusafzai in the Pesháwar and Hazára
Tarman.
I The descendants of Usmán are called Afrídis and reside in Tíráh, the Kohát and Khaiber Passes and in Bárá.
$ The descendants of Jadrán live in Jadran, ilága Kábul.
Darwesh Muhammad alius Chanju. ll The descendants of Khogiáni, called Khogianís, live in the hills to the north-west of the Koh-i-Sufed.
| The Wazírs reside in independent territory to the west of the Khatak country.
Akor Khan alias Malak ko.ft ** The descendants of Shitak, called Shítaks, live in Dawar and K.bost in the Kábul ilága.
tf All the Khatak Chiefs, including the present Khán, belong to the Akor Khel family.
11 The Zanais live in the Peshawar district and are generally said to be Miáns (Káká Khels), descendants of one Yásín, son of Zanai. They live at
Ziárat Káká Sáhib in that district.
$$ The descendants of Mirai are commonly called Báraks. But the real Báraks are the descendants of Barak, son of Yásín,
ill The descendants of Amir inhabit the village of Amir in the Khwarra tappa of the Kohát tahsil.
il The descendants of Tarkai reside at Dallan, Amánkot, Gurgurry and Ganderi in the Darra circle and at Khatti Nasráti, Shiva and other villages in
the Bárak tappa.
*** The descendants of Khurram, son of Battu, are called Khurrams, and those of Marwat and Nandrak, the Mahramzais. The descendants of Mandun
and Múshak, sons of Dattu, occupied the Zira and Pațiála tappás of the Kohát tahsil.
Att Saghir had six sons, the descendants of the first, second and third sons are called the Sagharis, Bhangi Khels, and Makoris, respectively, and those
of the remaining three who owned three shares came to be known as Dartappis (from drethree, tappá, share).
111 Seni is said to have belonged to another tribe, but he married a woman from the family of Boláq, son of Luqman Khatak, and thus became entitled
to inboritance. The Senis are descended from him (From Major H. P. P. Leigh's Assessment Report, 1894).
5207



528
Thanks to-Babar's Memoirs and Khushhál Khán Khatak's history
of the tribe the annals of the Khataks are singularly complete,
Many years after Bábar had acquired Kábul, the Khataks either taking
advantage of the confusion which prevailed in the confines of the
Delhi kingdom, or driven from their original seats in the Shinwal range
(in Wazíristán), separated from their kinsmen the Shítak Karlárnis
and moved north-west, towards the Lowá-Ghar range, Karbogha, Tírait,
into Chauntra, to Iláchi (Láchi) and the Shakardarra towards the Indus.
At this time Kohát (Lower Bangash) was in the possession of the Orakzai
Patháns with whom the Khataks were at feud, and the latter in alliance
with the tribes of Upper Bangash defeated the Orakzais, in two fights
at Tápí and Muhammadzai near Kohát town, compelling them to fall
back towards Tíráh, while the Khataks themselves pushed on towards
Níláb, Pațiála and Súníála on the Indus. Driving the Awáns before
them the Khataks pushed their inroads as far as Sakeshr, Bhera
and Khushåb, occupied Makhad and for a considerable period heid
Kájábagh. In Akbar's reign Malik Akor or Akorai became a vassal
of the emperor and in 1587 he founded a kora, on the south bank
of the Kábul, and his son Yahyá seized upon the territory of the
Mandar Patháus which lay nearest to that river. This tract became
known as Tari-Boláq from the two sections of the Khațaks which held
it. They failed, however, to subjugate the whole Mandar tribe and
were only able to establish a footing on the northern bank of the Kábul
opposite Akora.
In !630 the ulús or tribal levy of the Khataks joined in the
combined attack by the Pathán tribes round Peshawar on that fortress,
although their Arbáb Sháhbáz Khán was with the Mughals at Peshawar
at the time.* The Mughal authority was, however, soon re-established,
and in 1659 Khush hál Khán, who had now succeeded his father
Shahbaz in the chieftainship,t was employed by them in an expedition
against the Afrídís and Orakzais of Tíráb, whence he returned in 1660.
After Aurangzeb was firmly established on the Delhi throne Khushhal,
however, fell into disgrace and was imprisoned at Rantabhur, but he
was released after more than two years' captivity in 1666, and was
with Muhammad Amin Khán, subahdár of Kábul, at the great disaster
which befell the Mughals in the Khaibar in 1672. Disgusted with
the ungenerons treatment he received at the hands of the Mughals,
Khush hal did not accord his loyal support to the Mughal cause and his
opinion of Aurangzeb is set forth in some spirited verses. The fief of
Tari Boláq held by the Khataks, appears to have been now granted by
the Mughals to Sher Muhammad Bangash and this led to a bitter feud
with the tribes of Bangash, in the course of which Khushhál's son
Ashraf defeated the Koháțis. A second defeat at the Turkai Pass
followed, but in 1673 Sher Muhammad Bangash returned from his long
exile in Hindustan and won over the Síní branch of the Khataks.
Khushhal Kuán though supported by the Afrídis was also hampered
* Khushbál in his bistory tries to make out that the Khataks did not join this rebellion
against the Mughals.
+ He succeeded his father in 1641.
* Raverty's Poetry of Afgháns, p. 18,
& Raverty dates the events, which culminated in the second defeat of the Kohátis at
the Turkai Pass, back to 1652-54, which appears too early.



Khattak history.
529
by the disaffection of the Múshaks, a clan of the Boláq Khataks, and
his, Afridi allies having attacked Kohát prematurely were repulsed.
Khushhál sought refuge in Tíráh and thence wandered into the Yúsafzai
country, but as he lamented in verse, he failed to rouse them against
the Mughal power, and his son, now nominally chief of the Khataks,
was sent in charge of a Mughal force against his father's allies--the
Afrídis. Another Mughal defeat was the result, and Khushhal was
enabled to make another attempt on Kohát, but deserted by the Sínís
and Múshaks as before he was defeated and wounded in 1675. Two
years later Ashraf Khán was granted Tari-Bolaq as sardár of the tribe,
and further misunderstanding arose between father and son. The
latter waged war on the Malik Mírí Bangash and took the fort of
Dodá from the Shadi Khel in 1680. Subsequently the Mughal faujdárs
fell out with the Maliks Míri and Ashraf Kbán, when called upon
for aid againsů them, compelled them to surrender Kohát but protected
them from Mughal vengeance, and thus enabled his brother Bahrám
to undermine his influence with the sulahdúr of Kábul who treacherous.
ly seized him when on a visit to Pesháwar and deported him to
Hindustan.
In 1684 Afzal Khán, son of Ashraf Khan and now acting chief of
the Khataks, was in charge of the road from Khairábád to Naushahra,
but the exactions of the Mughal officials, or their legitimate demands
for revenue, drove him into the Khwarram. He liad also to contend
with Bahrán, his uncle, whose authority was acceptable to many of
the Khataks, but on Khushhal's death in 1688 Afzal made his peace
with the Mughal authorities and Babrám having lost their favour, he
again obtained charge of the Naushahra rcad in 1692. But Afzal failed
to completely establish his authority till his father's death in 1694
made him chief of the Khataks, although Bahrám was still active.
In 1701 Amír Khán, subahdár of Kábul, died and Shah Alam moved
from Multán to secure the vacant province. On his return in 1702-03
via Bannu and Lakki he marched into the Isa Khel country and
atteinpted to reach Pesháwar by Kálábágh, but was reduced to great
straits by the Bangi Khel and other Sághari Khataks until Afzal
Khán rescued him and escorted him to Lakki. Bahrám was sub-
sequently seized and sent to Kábul, but he escaped and Afzal Khan
was employed to suppress him and another rebel, Ismail Khan Bangash,
Afrer Aurangzeb's death Shah Alam offered Afzal service in Hindo-
stán but he declined it, as the emperor was unable to leave any
subahdár over the Kábul province, and remained in charge of the
road from Attock to Pesháwar. He also won over Ismail Khán, while
Bahrám sided with Qábil Khán, Ismail's rival for the Bangash chief-
ship. Eventually the latter was acknowledged by all the ulús of
Bangash and this secured Afzal's position, Saif Khản his son becom-
ing faujdár of Láchi, which had been the centre of Bahrám's power.
Qábil, however, soon broke out again and the next faujdár of Láchi,
Nijábat Khán, had to be sent against him. Qábil secured the Mughals.
aid, but Afzal astutely played off Allahdad, who held an imperial sanad !
as faujdár of Bangash, against the subahdár of Kábul (Ibrahim Khan,
a son of Ali Mardán Khán), and the Mughal forces with Qabil weré
withdrawn in 1708 or 1709. Bahrám's death followed in 1712 but
the feuds among the Bangash continued and Afzal's son Said Khan,



530
Khattak weddings.
now faujdár of Láchi,* sent a jirga to arbitrate between them, but its
members were murdered. In revenge he attacked the Bangash and
defeated them.
In 1718 Sarbaland Khán was appointed subahdár and sustained a
defeat by the Afgháns in the Khaibar and Afzal took advantage of his
reverse to refuse to pay peshkash for Tari-Bolaq and the Mughals with
their Bangash vassals had to resort to force to collect it. The subah.
dár also transferred the fief to a brother of Afzal, who retired to
Chauntra, and subsequently declined an offer of the fief made him by
the faujdár of Bangash. In 1723-24 Sarafráz, a descendant of Shaikh
Bahádur, Khushhál's spiritual guide, raised disturbances in Láchi and the
Khwarram, which Asadulláb, Afzal's son and faujdár of Láchi, was
unable to suppress. Afzal himself had to seek an asylum among the
Yásufzais, but in 1725 he was able with their aid to defeat the fanatical
mulláhs, tálibs and darwesh who lost 600 killed, although he had only
3,000 men and the rebels with their Afrídi and other allies number-
ed 7,000 or 8,000. Here the Khattak chronicles end.
The chief seats of the Khatak power were Akora, Shahbázgarh,
Kalábágh and Makhad. The Khataks vary in physique and dress.
Those near Upper Míránzai resemble their Bangash neighbours, but
the Barak Khataks are tall, heavily built and stolid with shaggy hair
cut down to the level of the ear and thick beards a hand-breadth in
length. Their dress is generally of white cotton, rarely washed,
and the turban is twisted into a kind of rope. In the fields they
wear a long shirt, reaching to the ankles, of cotton or wool and
tied with a bit of rope, Simple but sturdy and independent they are
very clapnish. The Ságharis of Shakardarra are tall and spare, accus-
tomed to a hard active life and so smarter and livelier. In still greater
contrast to the Baraks are the Khataks of Akoſa, men of medium height,
who do not clip the beard, though they shave the head. They are well
able to hold their own against their Afrídi neighbours. Khatak women
dress in a blue shift with loose trousers, like the Bangash, and generally
possess few or no ornaments.
Khațak wedding customs.
A young fellow who wants to get married sends a dallal (who may
be any one) to the parents of the girl to sound them as to the price
that he will have to pay for her. The dallál will return with a mes-
sage that the would-be bridegroom must pay Rs. 300 (e. g.) in cash to
the father as the bride-price : that he must, in addition, find Rs. 40 in
cash, ten mans of wheat, a couple of sheep, Rs. 60 worth of ornaments,
one maund of ghi at the time of the wedding; and that the haqq mahr
will be Rs. 200. If the young man can raise the cash down for the
betrothal, his dúm with the dallal, and his father or another relation go
to the house of the girl's father, who will not, however, appear himself
but will work through his dúm and his mukhtar. The money will be
counted out on to the chitán to the girl's dúm who will give it to the
girl's mother. The two dalláls will then go through what these
* Sadr Khán had been faujdúr of Láchi, on the part of Bahrám. The date of Saíd
Khán's appointment is not known.



Khattak weddings.
531
Bannúchis call the sharai nikáh, i. &., the sjáb-qabúl, on behalf of their
clients. Menhii is applied to the hands of all present with the intima-
tion that so-and-so's daughter is betrothed to so-and-so,
Neither betrothals nor marriages take place between the two. Ids.
Betrot hals take place in Ramzán but few marriages. This is on ac-
count of the fast more than anything else.
When the girl reaches puberty, if she has not already reached it, and
the bridegroom can raise the value of the ornaments, etc., and the grain
and ghi which are sent to the girl's people for the wedding banquet,
he sends his dún to ask if the other side is ready. On the date fixed
at about 8 or 9 p. m. he, with the males and females of his village and
from among his relations, starts to the house of the girl. The men of
the girl's village turn out to oppose them, by throwing clods, for some
tiine, but at last desist. Among the Wazírs, especially in former times,
swords were brandished and injury occasionally caused. However the
boy's party enters the village, and the boy and the men go to the
chauk, while the women go to the girl's house and sing love songs,
coming out after a while and singing to the boy to join them. Ho
then goes with a party of his men into the girl's courtyard and stands
in the middle while 8 or 9 men lift him in the air three times, he rais-
ing his hands to show how tall he is. The girl's dúm intertwines seven
strings of different colours, each the height of the boy, and as the boy
is lifted up the dúm jumps in the air swinging the cord so as to raise it
above the boy's head if he can in order to show that the girl's family is
superior. Then the boy is made to stand on a rezáí against the wall,
while five or six men of his party stand on each end of the rezái. The
women of his party gather together at one end of the rezál and the
women of the girl's party at the otber. Then the women of each party
sing love songs and abuse each other for several hours, while the boy
wbo keeps quiet, stands with his mouth covered with the end of his
turban. Just before dawn a female relative of the girl places patásas in
the middle of the rezáí and these are distributed. Then a younger
sister or some other young relation of the girl comes out of the house in
which the bride is, and her sheet and the boy's patká are tied together
by the bride's dúm. She holds the knot firm. The women of the boy's
party then leave the courtyard and go to the nearest water in which
one of the husband's family dips the blade of a sword letting the wa'er
drip into a ghara. This is repeated thrice and then the ghara is filled
up in the ordinary manner. Then they return to the house and the
water is sprinkled in the room where the girl is. The mother of the
girl then brings curds and forces the boy to take two mouthfuls after
which the boy gives the bride's sister a rupee to untie the knot.
The mother of the girl then presents a bed, pillow and sheet, and
puts on her the ornaments that have been bought after they have been
weighed in the presence of all by a goldsmith. The girl is then put on
a pony with the boy's dúm and the boy's party sets out none of the
girl's family going with them. On this day the village is feasted by
tbe boy and the girl remains for the night with his women folk. The
wedding by the mulláh takes place the next night and then the pair
are left alone. The next morning, however, the girl's dúm takes her
back to her parents with whom she remains a week or so after which



532
The Khattars.
sbe sends her dúm to say she wants to be fetched. She is taken to the
boy's home by đúm. The đúm is throughout an important person and
is fed on all occasions.
KHAȚȚAR, KAȚHAR, KAHȚAR, a tribe of the Attock district. The Khattars
claim kinship with the Awáns, and to be, like them and the western
Khokhars, descended from one of the sons of Qutb Shah Qureshi,
of Ghazni. But, the Awáns do not always admit the relationship,
and the Khattars are said often to claim Rájput origin. Mr. E. B.
Steedman, however, accepted their Aján origin, and, says tbat an
A wán admits it, but looks upon the Khattars as an inferior section
of the tribe to whom he will not give his daughters in marriage.
Sir Lepel Griffin, who relates the history of the principal Khattar
fainilies at pp. 561-9 of his Panjáb Chiefs, thought that they
were originally inhabitaats of Khorásán who came to India with
the early Muhammadan invaders. But Colonel Cracroft noted that the
Khattarg of Ráwalpindi still retain marriage customs which point to an
Indian origin ; and they themselves have a tradition of having been
driven out of their territory on the Indus near Attock into Afghánistán,
and returning thence with the armies of Muhammad of Ghori * Sir
Alexander Cunningham, on the other hand, would identify them with
a branch of the Kator, Cidaritæ, or Little Yúchi, from whom the Gújars
also are descended. (Archæological Survey Reports, II, p. 80). They
now hold the tract, known as the Khattar from their name, which ex-
tends on both sides of the Kála Chitta Pabár from the Indus to the
boundary of the Rawalpindi tahsil, and from Usmán Kátar on the north
to the Khair.i-Múrat hills on the south, and which they are said to
have taken from Gújars and Awáns. Raverty says that their seats of
authority were Bhaţiot or Blatoţ and Níláb on the Indus. They still
hold the lattor place which used to be called Takut-i-Níláb or 'the Throne
of the Blue Water'--the Indus. The Khattars sided with the Mughals
against the Khațaks, but although their chief Ghairat had been ap-
pointed fauj dár of Attock, they met with more than one reverse at the
hands of Khushhál Khan and Afzal Khán, the Kbatak chiefs in 1673
and 1718. Colonel Cracroft wrote: “The Khațţars enjoy an unenyi-
able notoriety in regard to crime. Their tract has always been one
in which heavy crime has flourished; they are bad agriculturists, ex-
travagant in their habits, keep hawks and horses, and are often back.
ward in paying their revenue. They do not allow their daughters to
inherit excepting in cases of intermarriage with members of the
family, and even then only for some special reason." On this Mr.
Steedman noted : “Since then they have become more civilised and less
addicted to deeds of violence. Socially the Khattars hold an inter-
mediate place, ranking below Gakkhars, Awaps, Ghebas, Jodras, and
other high class Rájputs.”
- Mr.T. P. Ellis wroto an interesting account of the tribe which merits
reproduction here both for itself and because it illustrates the ex-
* According to the Rawalpindi Gazetteer of 1883-84 the Khattars claim descent from
Chohán. youngest son of Qutb Shah, who established himself on the Indus where for many
years the tribe maintained its position. It was at least driven out by a Hindu tribe under
Ráj Deo, in 1175, but its chief, Khattar Khán, returning with Muhammad of Ghor, recaptured
Niláb and, taking its name from him, the tribe overran the open country between tbo Indus
and the Ráwalpindi, dispossessing the Awáns and Gójars.



533
Khattar septs.
traordinary divergencies of tradition as to the origin of tribes of no
great antiquity.
The Khațţars are generally credited with a Hindu origin, from
Khatris,* but they are themselves divided in belief as to their descent.
Some admit the Hindu origin, while those who deny it claim an Arab
descent, alleging they are closely connected with the Awáns. They claim
3 founders, Háshim, Abdulla and Mustafa, and say that in the time of
Harún-ur-Rashíd they came to Baghdad, and that in his jihád they
reached Hindustán via Baluchistán in which latter country there are
said to be 9,000 Khattar Salána (houses or graves). They allege
that they joined later in the raids of Sultan Mahmúd Ghaznavi who
settled them in Bagh Níláb whence they spread over the rocky barren
country of the Kalá Chitta range in Attock, Pindigbeb and Fattehjang
tabsils.
In order to meet to the generally accepted belief that they were crigin.
ally Hindus, even those who claim a Mussalman origin admit that
while at Bagh Níláb they became Hindus and were reconverted.
The Khattars are sometimes divided into two main branches, though
theyt themselves rarely speak of them. These are how the Kålá
Khattars and the Chitta Khattars. To the former belongs the Dhrek
family, to the latter the Wáh family, though they are closely connected
by intermarriage. It is possible that in this division lies the true expla.
nation of the conflicting stories as to origin, the former who are darkish
in colour being converted Hindus, and the latter of true Mussalman
descent overpowering and absorbing their predecessors.
The origin of the name Khattar is ascribed by those who claim an
Arab descent to a mythical Khattar Khan, the word Khattar being
synonymous with the word zabr.
Sub-divisions.
Khattar Khán is supposed to have had seven descendants, who like the
Gakkhars and many others founded as many septs with the patronymic
-ál. These were Firozál, Sirhál, Isál, Garhál, Balwal, Mittial and
Khariál. The Khațțars generally intermarry, indeed Cracroft attri.
buted the degeneracy of the Dhrek family to close intermarriage carried
on for several generations. The Wáh family has also taken to it of
recent times, Awaas both take from and give wives to Khattars, but
Patháns, Gakkhars and Sayyids will not give them brides. Very
strict pardah is maintained. Khattar wedding rites used to closely ré
semble those of Hindus, Brahmans even being present, but thej are
now solemnised according to strict Muhammadan rules. Till recently
Khattars were not allowed to eat the hare. The Khattars have a tribal
shrine that of Shah Abdul Wahab at Barot where both Khattars and
Ghakkars used to send the bodies of their dead for interment. A stone
near Bágh Níláb was formerly regarded as the shrine of Nuri Sháb
* But the t is soft in Khatri and hard in Khattar. The identification with Kator is
equally untenable, as Mr. W. Irrine has shown in J.R. A. Ş., 1911, p. 218.
+ It is possible that these names are territoi ial and derived from the Kálá Ohittá Range.
Í Other septs are the Jandál and Raniál, the former giving its name to the tract south
of the Kálá Chitta.



534
Khawasa-Khetrán.
Abdul Rahman, but pilgrimages to this stone have now coased almost
entirely. The only notable superstition is that if rain fails the women
of the village collect together and fill gharas with water just outside
the village. The village Khán is sent for and he takes hold of the
plough, and thereupon the women throw the gharas of water over him.
This is supposed to be efficacious in bringing on rain. To keep jinns off
from the threshing floor pointed sticks are stuck on end in the various
heaps of corn collected on the floor.
KHAWAS, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KHEPAR, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Ke Era, a Ját (agricultural) tribe found in Kabírwala tahsil; Multán district,
whither they migrated from the Lakki jungle in
Rai.
the 13th century. It is also found in Ludhiana and
Amritsar. It gives the marginal pedigree and thus
Jado.
claims Solar Rájput origin. Its home was Mathra-
Bashál. nagari on the Jumna, whence they migrated to
Takhar-wind in the Málwa. An attempt to settle
angpál.
in Kbadúr was foiled by the Káng, but eventually
filmachha. the latter tribe was defeated and the Khera settled
in their present villages in Amritsar. Khera was
Jai Ras.
the son of a Sidhú Ját's daughter and treated his
Jatu. relations-in-law barshly-whence the name Khera
fr. kharwa, bitter.'
Boas.
Manj.
Janon.
Dhor.
Mal.
Lakhisan.
Khera.
KHERE, & Kamboh (agricultural) clan found in Amritsar.
KEETRÁN, a tribe settled in the Loralai District of Balochistán at the back of
the Laghari, Khosa, and Lund country. Their original settlement was
at Vahoa in the country of the Kasráni of Dera Ismail Khár, where
many of them still live and hold land between the Kasráni Baloch
(with whom they have long been at feud) and the river. But the
emperor Akbar drove out the main body of the tribe, and they took ro-
fuge in the Bárkhán valley which is still held by the Náhar sept of the
Khetrans as inferior proprietors, the Lagháris being its superior own-
ers. They are certainly not pure Baloch, and are held by many to be
Patháns, descended from Miána, brother of Tarín, the ancestor of the
Abdáli; and they do in some cases intermarry with Pathans. But
they confessodly resemble the Baloch in features, habits, and general
appearance, the names of their septs end in the Baloch patronymic
termination áni and they are now for all practical purposes a Baloch



Khewa Khilche.
535
tribe. It is probable that they are in reality a remnant of the original
Ját population ; they speak a dialect of their own called Khetráni
which is an Indian dialect closely allied with Sindhi, and in fact
probably a form of the Jatki speech of the lower Indus. They are
the least warlike of all the Baloch tribes, capital cultivators, and in
consequence very well-to-do. Their lands are generally divided into
large blocks held by numerous sharers, each proprietor holding
shares in many such blocks scattered about in different villages. The
tribe, as it now stands, is composed of four clans, of which the
Ganjúra represents the original Khetrán nucleus, while to them aro
affiliated the Dháriwál* or Chácha who say that they are Dodai Baloch,
the Hasani, once an important Baloch tribe which was crushed by
Násir Khán, the great Khán of Kalát, and took refuge with the
Khetrán of whom they are now almost independent, and the Náhar
or Bábar, who are by origin Lodi Patháns. The name, as Dames
observes, is undoubtedly derived from khetr'field.'
Khewá, a boatman.
Kuchar, a sept of Játs in Jind; see under Jaria.
KHICHI, KAICHC81, a Muhammadan tribe of Ját status, found as a compact
tribe almost exclusively round Mailsi in Multán and in the northern part
of Gugera tahsil, Montgomery district.t It claims Chauhan origin and
descent from one Khichi Khán, a ruler in Ajmer. Driven out of
Delhi by the Muhammadans his descendants Sísan and Vadur mig.
rated to Multán. The Khichis fought with the Joigas, then para-
mount in those parts, and also say that they were sent against the
rebellious Baloch of Khái by the Mughals, in Multán. In Montgomery
the Khichis say they were converted to Islám by Baháwal Haqq,
wandered up the Rávit abandoned agriculture for cattle-breeding and
joined the Kharrals in robbery, but under the rule of Kamr Singh
Nakkáí resumed cultivation and are now industrious peasants.
KHIDR KHEL (a corruption of Khizr), (1) a section of the Sen Khel, Gadaizai,
Iliászai, Bunerwal; (2) a hamsáya section of the Shahozai, Dumar,
Sanzar Kákar-Patháps.
KHIDRZAI, a section of the Razzar Mandaur Patháns, in Posháwar.
Khichí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur: see Khiljí.
* Dháriwál is the name of an important Ját tribe. Mr. Bray says that in Balochistán
three clans are recognised, viz., Ispáni, Palliát, Dhirewal or more correctly Dhara. The
term Ganjúra is occasionally applied to the first two clans, or even to the whole tuman
(tribe). The Hasani and Chácha are merely septs affiliated to the Dhara, while the Náhar
l? hyænas) are a sept of the Ispáni. Folk etymology derives Dhițewál from dharwal, a
shepherd, aud dhaſa is said to mean 'heap.'
+ They are thus found along the lower and middle Sutlej, and ou the Rávi from Multán
to 'Lahore, but there are also a few of them on the Chenáb, and the 'e are considerable
numbers of them in the Delhi district where they appear to be recognised as a sept of the
Chauhan. In Shahpur they are also found and in that District they are classed as Ját
(agricultural), but in Montgomery they are classed as Rájputs. In the Chenab Colony most
of them returned themselves as Rájputs, but some as Játs. In the Sándal Bár they were
dependents of the Kharrals, although superior to them in status taking wives from them,
but refusing to give them brides. They were, however, not counted as belonging to the
great Rávi' tribes, and it is possible that the Khichi of the Bár and in Shábpur are really.
Khilchi or Khilji, not the Chauhan Khichi of Multán.



536
Khiljá Khoja.
Kailí, a Mughal clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. It appears to be
quite distinct from the KHICHI, and is probably the representative of
the KHALJ.
KHIRA, a tribe of Jáțs found in the Pasrúr and Daska tahsils of Sialkot.
Kbíra was a son of Sanpál. Like the Ghummans they are Bajwa
Rájputs by descent.
Kaíwa, a clan with some pretensions to Rájput origin, and locally ranking
somewhat above the Játs, found in Jhelum. Like the Bharat and
Kallas it gives bride to the. Jálap. The Khíwa are also found in
Shahpur as an agricultural clan.
KHIR KAEL, (1) a clan of the Soni or Suni Sarwárni Patháns, according
to Raverty. Settled in the Khaibar in Babar's time, they were attack-
ed by him and driven into the mountains in 1519. They had molested
him on his march over the pass, and in 1507 hart opposed his advance
through it with the Shamá Khel, Kharlakbi and Khogiáni. This clan
appears to be extinct, absorbed or now divided into septs, the name
being forgotten or disused : (2) a minor fraction of the Mintar Khel,
Muhammad Khel, Hassan Khel, Mohmit Khel, Utmánzai Darwesh
Khel of the Wazírs.* See under Khidr Khel.
KBIZRZA1, a section of the Natozai, Dumar, Sanzar Kakar Patháns.
Kho, a term applied to the inhabitants of Torikho and Muikho. or Tono
and Lower Kho, in Chitral, The Kho appear to be a mixed race and
comprise families descended from Badakhshis, Shighnis, Wakhis and
Gilgitis. Nevertheless they appear to give their name to Khowar
or Chitráli, the language of the great mass of the people in the country
drained by the Chitral river and its affuents, as far down as Mirkhanni,
as well as in the Ghisar valley above Pingal. It includes many loan
words from Persian, Pashtu and Urdu.
KHOD, a Muhammadan clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KAOGIÁNI, KHUGIÁNI, a tribe of the Karláni Patháns which at one time
occupied the whole of Khost, but is now found in Kurram. The name
has fallen into disuse except in Peshawar, where a few Patháns of this
name are found. Both the Jaji and the Túri of Kuriam claim to
be descendants of Khugiáni, son of Kakai, but their Pathán origiu is
open to doubt.
KOJA, fem. -I.-The word Khoja is really nothing more than our old friend
the Khwaja of the Arabian Nights, and means ximply a man of wealth
and respectability. In the Punjab it is used in three different senses ;
for a eunuch,t for a scavenger converted to Islám, and for a Muham:
manan trader. I It is only in the last sense that the Khojas can be
* A Dictionary of the Pathan Tribes, 1899, p. 109.
+ Khoia also means bald. For the eunuchs seo under Hijrá. For Khwaja as a title see
unuer Khwája. A's a title Khoja appears to be used only by or of Khojas by caste.
+ The Khoias of Bombay are well known for their wealth and commercial enterprise. but
they do not appear to have any connection, as a caste, with those of the Punjab. Dissent
from orthodox Muhammadanism is however everywhere well marked among the Khojas, who
are thus described in Burton's Bistory of Sindh, pp. 248-249.
o The Khwajeh (or as the word is generally pronounced Khwajo and Khojo) is a small
tribe of strangers settled in Sindh, principally at Karachi, where there may be about three
hundred families.



537
Khoja groups.
called a casto,' but there does not appear to be any true caste of
Khojas, any Hindu trader converted to Isláin being known by that
naine. Thus the Khojas of Shahpur are almost entirely Khatris, and
a Khatri now becoming a Musalmán in that District would be called a
Khoja. The Khojas of Jhang, on the other hand, are said to be con-
verted Aroſas ; while some at least of the Lahore Khojas claim Bháția
origin, and one section of the Ambála Khojas are Káyaths. But in the
north-west Punjab and the northern districts of the North-West
Frontier Province, the term Parácha is preferred by Hindu traders con-
verted to Islám, so that where the Paráchas are a recognised and
wealtby caste, khoja is used for miscellaneous Muhammadan traders,
chiefly hawkers and pedlars, or at least petty traders; while in the
Gastero districte nod in the Deraját, where the Khojas are commercially
important, parácha is used for the Mohammadan pedlar.
These Muhammadan traders, whether called Khoja or Parácha, are
found all aloog thạ northern portion of the two Provinces under the
bills from Amritsar to Peshawar, and have spread southwards into the
central and eastern districts of the Western Plains, but have not entered
the Deraját or Muzaffargarh in any numbers. Their eastern boundary
is the Sutlej valley, their western the Jhelum-Chenób, and they are
found throughout the whole of the Salt Range. Probably it is hardly
correct to say of them that they have " spread" or "entered," for they
apparently include many distioct classes who will have sprung froin
different centres of conversion. They appear to be most numerous in
Lahore. An interesting account of a trade derelopment by the Khojas
of Gujrát and Sialkot is given in Punjab Government Home Proceed-
ings No. 10 of March 1879. It appears that these men buy cotton
piece-goods in Delhi and hawk them about the villages of their own
Districts, selling on credit till harvest vime, and the business has now
assumed very large proportions. The Khojas of the Jhang district
were thus described by Mr. Monckton: “ They do not cultivate with
their own hands, but own a great many wells and carry on trade to a
considerable extent. They are supposed to have been converted
from Hinduism. Thoy do not practise cattle-stealing, but are a liti-
gious race, and addicted to fraud and forgery in the prosecution of
their claims."
In spite of their conversion to Islám, the Khojas retain inany traces
of the Khatri caste organization. Thus at Bhera in Sháhpur they have
the following sub-divisions :
1. Sahgal.
4. Kapur.
7. Gorawala.
2. Wohra or BOHRA.
5. Duggal.
8. Magun.
8. Sethi.
6. Rawar or Ror. I 9. Mchndru.
...
Their own account of their origin is that they emigrated from Persia. Probably they
fled the country when the Ismailiyeh heresy (to which they still cleave) was so severely
threatened by Holaku Khan. They differ from the Ismailites in one essential point, viz.,
whereas that race believes in only seven Imáms, the Khwajehs continue the line down to
the present day. They are therefore heterodox Shiahs, as they rejeci Abubakr, Umar,
and Usmán, Muhammed Bakir and Imám Jáfar.i-Sádik. In Sindh they have no mosques,
but worship in a kano or house prepared for that purpose. For marriages and funerals
they go to the Sunni Kázis, but their Mukhi or head priest at Karachi settles all their
religious and civil disputes. Under the Mukhi, who is changed periodically, are several
officers called Waris, and under these again are others termed Khamriya.”



538
Rhojah-Khohánra.
-all Khatri sections. A tenth, Matoli, does not appear to be a Khatri
section, but it ranks with the first six, and from these seven the last
three cannot obtain wives, though they give brides to them. The
Khojas of Bhera* claim to be strictly monogamous, so much so that, as a
rule, a Khoja cannot obtain a second wife in the caste, even though
his first have died and he is thus driven to take his second wife from
some other Muhammadan tribe. The Khojas of Leiah have the Khatri
section-names of Kapúr, Púri, Tandan and Gambhír but as these are
no longer exogamous and as wives may be taken from other castes, the
old rules of hypergamy and endogamy are no longer in force.
The Khojas of Jhang have at least four claps, Magun, Wohra,
Wadawána and Passija. The last named is undoubtedly of Arora
origin. At Chinioț in Jhang the Khojas are mainly Khatris, recruited
by some Arora sections, thus :-
Khatri scction.
Aroța sections.
Adal.
Tarneja.
Behrára.
Indigenous to Chiniot. Goruwála.
Churra.
Talwár.
Khurána.
Immigrants from 3 Maggun.
Puri,
Dhingra.
the south-west. Sahgal.
Toprá.
Cháwala.
Wadhaun,
i Wihra.
T'he original Khatri classification into Bári and Bunjáhi groups is said
to be still preserved. Formerly the Khatri sections used not to inter-
marry with the Aroſas, but this restriction is said to be no longer ab-
solute, though such marriages are not usual. The Khojas in Chiniog
reverence Pir Giláni, the descendant of Imám Hassan, and his descend.
ants live in Kotla, Gujranwala district. The Khojas have a cemetery
of their own at Chiuioț called the Hafiz Díwán.
The Wohra are possibly the same as the Borat of Central India. In
Central India they have a remarkable colony at Ujjain, which is divided
into four maháls under elected Mullahs. Malcolmſ says they belong
to the Hassani sect and are a progressive community. The Khojas of
Makhad (a place on the Indus) are more usually called Parachas. They
have houses of a peculiar structure-in fact, the Khojas' enterprise
seems to be as marked as their high standard of comfort, and in this
they are somewhat different to the Khatris.
KHOJAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán. Cf. Kohjá.
KBOJí, a title of honour given to Kashmírís.
Khádal, a Ját tribe which migrating from Jammu settled in the north of
Multán tahsil in Mughal times.
KHOHÁNEA, a tribe of the SAMMAS, found in Baháwalpur. The Sang
branch of the Sammas has a tradition that in ancient times the Sammas
had two grades, one superior and genuine, the other comprising 13 in-
ferior septs who were wazírs of the Sammas. To these latter belonged
the Khohánra.
* The Khojas of Bhera have a legend that they were expelled from Chak Sano, a
ruined village in Bhera tahsil, some two or three centuries ago. They have an extensive
trade with Kábul and beyond, and inbabit a remarkably well-built mohalla in Bhera, whero
they take a leading part in municipal affairs.
op (?) from beohá trade.
* Memoir on Central Iudia and Málwa, Vol. I, pp. 91.2.



The Khokhars.
539
KHOKHAR, -UR.-(1) a tribe, found among Játs, Rájputs, Aráiņs*, and Chuhrás
(see infra). As a tribe of varying Rájput and Ját status the Khokhars
are most numerous along the valleys of the Jhelum and Chenab, and
especially in the Jhang and Sháhpur districts. They are also found,
though in smaller numbers, on the lower Indus and the Sutlej, espe-
cially in Lahore, and also all along the foot of the hills from the Jhelum
to the Sutlej. Pind Dadan Khán in the Jhelum is said to have been
refuunded by a Háda Rájput from Garh Chitor, named Fateh Chand,
who on conversion to Islám was re-named Dádan Khán.t He was Rája
of those parts in the time of Jahángír, but the Khokhars had held the
tract at an earlier period for they are mentioned as its occupiers in the
Aín-i-Akbari. They also once ruled an extensive tract in Jhang lying
east of the Jhelum. The Khokhars of Gujrát and Sialkot have a tradi-
tion that they were originally settled at Garh Karána, which they can-
not identify, I but were ejected by Tímúr and they went to Jammu,
whence they spread long the hills, and the concentration of the
Khokhars of the plains on the Jhelum and Chenáh, and their wide
diffusion in the sub-montane tract are explained by the history of
Tímúr's invasion. In Akbar's time they were shown as the principal
tribe of the Dasúya pargana (in Hoshiarpur) and they now give their
name to the Khokharain, a tract which contains some 40 Khokhar
villages, all but three of which are in Kapúrthala State on the borders
of Dasuya tahsil. In Kapurthala the Khokhars have four eponymous
septs, Sajrái, Kálú, Ber and Jaich. In Shahpur the Khokhars are said
to be split up into numerous septs, among which are the NissowÁNA.
The Bhațți and Kudhan are septs found in Montgomery.
The origins of the Khokhars are as obscure as those of any Punjab
tribe. Tradition appears invariably to connect them with the Awáns,
making Khokhar one of Qutb Shah's sons and the Khokhar Qutb Sháhis
his descendants, who would thus be akin to the JÚHÁNs also. But this
pedigree probably merely records the fact that the Awáns and Khokhars
owe their conversion to Islám to the saint Qutb Shah or his disciples, or
that they both accepted his teachings. ll. However this may be the
Khokhars in Sialkot intermarry with other tribes, which the A wáns will
not do, and thus in a sense rank below them. In Gujrát, where they
hold a compact block of villages abont Mung on the Jhelum and own
some of the richest lands in the District, the leading Khokhars are called
Rájá, as being of Rájpnt status or descent from Bharat and Jasrat.'
Yet they claim kinship with the A wáns and intermarry with them and
the Bhattis, giving wives to the Chibbs, but not getting brides in re.
turn. Moreover the Khokhar themselves vary in status. In the east
* Punjabi Dicty., p. 602. Chuhřás and Náis may be arlded.
+ The history of this family will be found at p. 589 ff. of Griſſin's Panjab Chiefs.
| Kirána Hill in Jhang cannot well be meant.
$ There are two Khokhar chhatt or leading villages in the Khokkarain, Tahli in
Hoshiárpur and Begowal in Kapúrthala.
Il That the Khokhars were originally Hindus appears hardly open to question. The
Khokhars in Jhelum say they used to keep up certain Hindu customs, and had parohits, who
were Datts, until recent times, but that this is no longer the case. They do not know
whether they are connected with other Khokhars of the Punjab.
At births, weddings, etc., they observe Ját usages, but have no rathúchári like them
and no dur like the Gujars. Before the wedding procession starts presents are given
to 7 kamíns. -a Nái, Mirási, Tarkhán, Lohár, Kumhár, Dhoba and Rá(i) or Hindu. And
when the procession reaches the bride's house her father brings as many presents in a
thale and they are also given to these kaming
et block sense rank with other tudowever #2



540
Khokhar traditions.
of the Punjab they marry, on more or less equal terms, with other Ráj.
puts and so rank as a Rájput tribe. But in Jallundur they are said to
intermarry in their own tribe or with Shaikhs, Awáns and the like,
rather than with their Rájput neighbours. About Pind Dadan Khán
the Rajput Khokhars are said to be entirely distinct from the Ját
Khokhars, thongh elsewhere in Jhelum the tribe has for the most part
become merged with the 'Ját' cultivators. Thase of Rájput status,
however, marry into some of the best Janjúa families. In Babáwalpur
the Khokhars are found in some numbers and many of them return their
main tribe as Bhatti. They intermarry among themselves, but some-
times give brides to Joiyas. One, wellknown sept is called Missan, so
called because they once gave a mírási a loaf made of missi (gram
flour) and in revenge he satirised them.
In an article entitled A History of the Gakkhars, contributed to the
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal in 1871, by Mr.J. G. Delmerick,
the Khokhars of the Muhammadan historians were taken to be the
Gakkhaſs. The late Major Raverty, however, expressed a strong opin.
ion that the writer of the article bad confused the Gakkhars with the
Khokhars, a totally distinct tribe, and a full examination of all the evi-
dence at present readily accessible, has copvinced the present writer of
the correctness of Major Ravorty's position. The Khokhars were set.
tled in the Punjab centuries before the Gakkhars, and were early spread
all over the central Districts of the Province before the Gakkhařs ac-
quired their seats in the Salt Range, to which they are and always have
been confined. If this thesis be correct, it follows that Farishta's de-
scription of the customs of polyandry and female infanticide, as practised
by the tribe, apply not to the Gakkhass at all, but to the essentially
Punjab tribe, the Khokhars.
The traditional history of the Khokhars.*
Beorásáhsá, t who succeeded Jamshid, King of Persia, was called
Dahák or the 'Ten Calamities.' On his shoulders were two snake-like
tumours, whence he was nick-named Márán or Aydahá by the Persians,
and called Dahák (or Zuhák) i Márán, while his descendants were de-
signated Táks-bansi, Nág-bansi or Takshak. About 1500 B. C. Káma,
the ironsmith, aided Farídún, a desceniant of Jamshid, to subdue
Dahák, who was cast into the well of Koh Damavind, and Farídún be-
came King of Persia. One of Dahák's descendants, named Bustám
Rájá, surnamed Kokrá, was governor of the Punjab and had his capital
at Kokráná, on a hill in the Chinhath Doab, but it is now called Koh
Kiráná. At the same time Mihráb, also a descendant of Zuhák, held
Kábul as a feudatory of Farídán.
there in the Poniral District Range, too, it followinfanticide, as practically
* By a Kbokhar of Khokharain, in the Hoshiarpur district, Punjab.
+ Afrásiáb.
i Zuhák is merely the Arabicised form of Dahák. Zuháka was another name for Záhal,
the ancient fortified city, identified by Raverty with the Maidán-i-Rustam Koh, visited by
Bábar. It was Rustam's appanage and lies on the sources of the Tochi and the Zurmat
rivers
$ Tak for Dahák.
1 A singularly unsuccessful attempt to identify the isolated Kiráná Hill, that in the Jhang
district, with Kokráná by assuming that the syllable ko. was mistaken for the Persian koh,
mountain and dropped in the course of time-an utterly impossible suggestion.



Khokhar traditions.
541
After acquiring the Persian throne, Farídún marched against Dahák's
descendants. Bustám fled and sought refuge in the Hill of Ghor, west
of Kandahár, where his people ruled for generations, being called Ghorí
or Ghoríá and all being pagans.
. Some years later Bustám was murdered and some powerful Rájá took
possession of the Sindh-Ságar Doáb, where Alexander found Takahail
iTaxiles), founder of Takshala (Taxila), now Dheri Sháhán in the Attock
district. But before the Macedonian invasion Kaid Ráj, King of
Márwár, overran the Punjab in the reign of Darius Hystaspes, soon
after Bustám's murder. His capital was Bherá on the Jhelum district
and he also founded a fort at Jammu, which he entrusted to Virk*
Khokhar, one of his kinsmen. Virk, with his own tribesmen, conquered
the northern hills, and then, in league with the hillmen of Kohát and
the Sulaimán Hills, drove Kaid Ráj out of the Punjab. The Khokhars,
under such chiefs as Jot, Sálbáhan, Tál, Bál, Sirkap, Sirsuk, Vikram,
Hodi, Sándá, A kap, Khokhar (sic), Bádal and Kob, thenceforward held
the Punjab.
A long period after this, Bahrám, Rájá of Ghor, left Shoráb, which
lay 100 miles from Qanda hár,+ and, regaining the Kokráná territory,
his hereditary province, he founded Shoráb to the east of the Kokráná
Hill. Another Rájá of Ghor, named Zamín Dáwar, founded ret another
city 3 kos to the east of Shoráb and called it Dáwar, and this was luid
waste by the Tartars, but the mound still exists. To the west of it lies
the new town of Dáwar, which is still in possession of the tribe. Shoráb
was destroyed by Sultán Mahmúd, and its roins stand at the foot of the
present Shorábwáli Pahári Hill.
Goriá, the Kokráná Rájá of Sharan, was succeeded by his two sons
Bádalſ and Bharths and 11 others who were sons of handmaids. Bádal
succeeded to the upland tracts of Chiniot and Kokráná, ll while Bharth
took those east of the Chenáb. The latter, who dwelt in Bharth, a
city named after himself, which lay 6 kos west of Nankáná village,
came, stone in hand, to aid his brother Bådal Khán in battle ; but learn-
ing that he had already fallen, he placed the stone on the ground and
marched to avenge his loss. He was, however, worsted in the conflict
and Bharth, his city, destroyed. But the stone still lies on the hill,
South of Chiniot Bádal founded Márí Tappá, on a hill still so called.
* This is to account for the existence of the Virk, a powerful Jat tribe, still numerous in
Gujranwálá. It also seems to connect them with the Khokhars.
+ Eight or ten miles west of Qandahár lies the village of Khokharán. The kabits of the
bards record a Rájá named Kokrá of Garh Kokráná, now called Kadyána.
I Bádal would appear to be a Hindu name; cf. Rai Bádal of Chittor. but lower down we
find him called Bádal Khán, the latter a Muhammadan title. It is curious to find Hindu
and Muhammadan names mixed up in this history without apparent sense of incongrvity.
Thus below we have Ratn Pal, undoubtedly a Hindu, descended from Sándá, whose three
brothers all bore Muhammadan names, even if Sándá was himself a Hindu. Among the
Moos of Gurgaon the position at the present time is precisely the same and the present head
of the Muhammadan Kharrals in the Lyallpur district is called Jagdeo.
§ The name Bharth frequently occurs in Punjab legends as the name of the ancestor of a
tribe, or even as a sept name.
|| It is unsafe to identify places like Bokráná with the Khokhars. Near Rohtak are un
mounds called Khokrá Kot, under which lie ancient cities, but the word Khokrá has no
connection with the Khokhar tribe. (See Rohtak gazetteer, 1883-4, p. 16.)



542
Khokhar traditions.
In the middle of the Chenáb he commenced a stone fort and a masonry
bridge which he never completed, but a wall of the fort, called the
Bádalgarh, still remains. With Dárá, bis beloved kinsman, Rájá Bádal
Khán (sic) was assassinated on his way to Mári Tappá, some 3 kos from
Chiniot, and here his tomb, called Bádal Dárá, still stands to the west
of the village of Amírpur.
Bharth's territory had extended as far as Gujrát, and he left 8 sons
of whom 4 left issue. These were Sándá, Hassan, Husain and Mahmúd.
Sándá built a city, Sándar, between the Rávi and the Dek streams, the
ruins of which are still called Sándar-ká tibba in the (Pindi) Bhattián
tract. He ruled so justly that his dominion is still called the Sándar or
Sándal Bár. * He left 4 sons, Mandár, Ratn Pál, Bálá, and Jál. From
Ratn Pál sprang the Rihián,t a sept which has two branches, the Nisso-
wánás, I and the Bhikhás,ş found in Shahpur and Jhang. Kálowál was
head-quarters of this sept. Sultán Mandár's descendants are now found
in Bannu where they trace their origin to Kais Abdur-Rashíd, and are
thus called Mandár (sic) Afgháns. Mandár himself prospered, kept in
with the ruler of Kábul and conquered the Kohistán-i-Namak and the
Koh-i-Nandaná. Of his twelve sons, three were legitimate, and of
these three Rai Singin remained in the Kohistán-i-Namak and married
his daughter to Sultán Jalál-ud-Din Khwárizmí, who made his son
general of his own forces, with the title of Qutlugh-Kháni. The second
son Ichhar founded Ich hrá near Lahore, and the third was Máchhí
Khán, who became Rájá of Chiniot, which was named from Chandan,
his sister, who built a palace on the hill as a hunting lodge for her
father. Márí Tappá was not then populated, but Aodherí was flourish-
ing, and north of it lay the dhaular, || or abode of Rani Changan, which
was called Chandniot, now Chiniot. When Andherí was deserted,
Máchhi Khan shifted his residence to the easiern bank of the river,
Rai Singin had four sons; Sarpál, Hast,** Vir and Dádan. Some of
Sarpál's sons went to Afghánistán and now trace their descent to Sháh
* But a local legend, recorded by Mr. E. D. Maclagan, says this Bár is so named after
one Sándal, a Chuhra, who used to commit great depredations. Another Chuhệá used to
live in the Gúa rock, i. e., the rock with the cavern,' and eat men. The people sometimes
called the Bár, Tattar, i.e., 'the Desert.'
† Probably the Ribáns, a tribe still found in Jhang district: see the Jhang Gazetteer,
1883.4, p. 67, where they are described as rulers in old days of the Kálowál tract, which
once formed a part of the Siál kingdom; (but they are not said to be a branch of the
Khokhars).
I The Nissowánás are also still to be found in Jhang-in the northern corner of Chiniot
tahsil : Jhang Gazetteer, p. 66.
§ The Bhikhas cannot be traced.
i Dhaular, in Pamjábi = palace (lit., 'white house').
This Machchhe Khán appears to be alluded to in the following ballad, which records
the deeds of the Chaddrá tribe of the Sándal Bár:-
Modá de Chiniót leó ne.
(After their victory over the Kharrals the
Chadrá) with a push of the shoulder (i.e.,
with a certain amount of trouble) took
Chiniót.
Zór changérá láéá ne.
They used more force.
Malik Machchhe Khán kutthó ne.
They killed Malik Machchhe Khán.
Ragrán rók ruláéá ne.
They harried and destroyed him.
** Hast: a Malik Hast is mentioned in Bábar's Memoirs (Elliott's History of India, Vol.
IV, pp. 236-37), but no particulars regarding him appear to be given. Raverty mentions
him and Sangar Khán as chiefs of the Janjúas and Júds.- Notes on Afghánistán, P. 365.



Khokhar traditions.
543
Husain Ghori. Chuchak or Achu was sixth and Malik Shaikh seventh
in descent from Sarpál, and the latter founded Shaikha, a fort, and
Dhankar, a village in the hill of Bháwán,* north of Manglán, he and his
father holding the hill-country and the tracts west of Gujrát. Malik
Shaikhá was appointed governor of Lahore by the king of Delhi, and
Nusrat, his younger brother, opposed Tínúr's invasion, with only 2,000
men, on the Beás.
Malik Jasrat, son of Shaikhá, is a historical personage. In 442 A.D.
he was murdered by his queen, a daughter of Bhím Deo, Rájá of
Jammú, because her father had been put to death by the Malik. His
descendants are found in Márí and Shakárpur in Gujrát, at Malikwál
in Shahpur, at Jasrat near Chiniot, and in Dhankar rear Khángáh
Dográn.
The Tartars spared the territories of Sarpál's descendants. After
1200 A. D.+ they had burnt all the Khokhar settlements on the Beás
and Sutlej. Rájá Vír Khán fed towards Multán, but returned and
founded Kángra, I kos from Chinioț, east of the Chenáb, but soon moved
towards the Beas with Kálu, his kinsman, who founded Káluwáhan, now
Kábnuwán,I in Gurdaspur, on the right bank of the river. For himself
Vír chose a tract 32 kos south of Káhnuwán, and there he founded
Vairowal in Tarn Táran, naming it after his son Vairo. Bháro, another
tribesman, founded Bhárowal in the same tahsil. Kalchandar, another
Khokhar, founded Mirowál, Mardáná, Auliapur, etc., in Siálkot. Rájá
Vír Khán also founded a new Kángra midway between Káhnuwan and
Vairowal. His territory was 40 kos in length, and the town extended
5 miles along the bank of the Beás. At its north and south gates stood
two forts or máris, S now occupied by Bhatti Rájputs and Panuán Játs.
On the ruins of this town now stands the small village of Kángra, I just
opposite to Tahli or Khokbarain on the west bank of the Beás.' iu
Hoshiarpur. In the village is the tomb of Ladahá Khán, Khokhar,
called the Pír Gházi, at which offerings are still made. This gházi's
head is said to be buried at Mandi Bohr, a village in Kapúrthala, 3
miles south of Tahli, to which place it was carried by the stream when
he was killed. Ladahá Khán left seven sons, (i) Jago, whose descend.
ants founded Dinamál, Akálgadhá and Kotlí Sára Khán in Amritsar.
close to Bhárowál and Vairowál ; (ii) Rup Rai, whose sons founded
Dánd in Raya tahsil, Sialkot; (iii) Bego, who founded Begowál and 16
villages, now in Kapúrthalá; (iv) Dasihan, the author's ancestor, who
founded Khokharaio** as his residence and 12 other villages : Jhán.
who founded Balo Chak, naming it after his son Bálo, with 9 more
villages. As these three brothers owned in all 40 villages the tract was
called the Cháliá Khokharán. Bhográ migrated to Murádábád.
* Possibly Bhaun in Jhelum.
† c. 600-A. H.
# Which place the Khokhars are said to have held in Akbar's time.
$ Mári in Panjábi means a lofty house of masonry, or a small room erected on the roof
of a house.
ll Of the Buchá gót, whence the present village is called Márí Buchián.
Kángrá is close to Sri Hargobindpur.
** Also called Táhli, because one of its quarters was so called from a táhli or shisham.
tree.



544
Khokhar history.
The Khokhars in the Muhammadan Historians of India.*
In 399 A.H. (1009 A.D.) the Gakkhars, by whom in all probability
are meant the Khokhate, then infidels, joined the Hindus who had
collected under the leadership of Anandpal to resist the sixth invasion
of India by Mahmúd. Their number is said to have amounted to 30,000
men, who, with heads and feet bare, and armed with spears and other
weapons, penetrated the Muhammadan lines on two sides, and in a few
minutes cut down three or four hundred Muhammadans.t
The earliest distinct mention of the Kokars occurs in the Táj-ul-
Ma'ásir, a history written in A. H. 602 (1205 A.D.), I which describes
the revolt of the tribe or confederacy under the chief's Bakan and Sarkí,
which occurred upon a false report of the death of the Sultan Muhammad
of Ghor having been put about by Aibak Bák, who seized Multán.
The Kokars raised the country between the Sodra (Chenab) and the
Jhelum and defeated the Muhammadan governor of Sang wán, who held
a fief within the borders of Moltán, but they were defeated by Qutb-ud-
Dín Aibak, and one of the sons of Kokar Rai escaped to a fort in tho
hill of Jíd, which was captured on the following day by the Sultán.||
The next mention of the Khokhars occurs in the Tabagát-i-Nasri,
written about 658 A. H. (1259 A. D.). It relates that Muiz-ad-Din
in 581 A. H. (1185 A. D.) ravaged the territory of Lahore, and on his
return homeward restored Siálkoț, in which fortress be left a garrison,
but as soon as his back was turned, Malik Khusrau, the last of the
Ghaznivides, assembled the forces of Hindustan and a lovy of the
Khokhar tribes and laid siege to Siálkot. This account is confirmed and
amplified by A History of the Rájás of Jammun, which says :-" The
tribe of Khokhar, who dwelt round about Manglán at the foot of the
hills and were subject to the Jammú dynasty, having received encour-
ayement from the Lahore ruler (Malik Khusrau), and sure of his sup-
port, refused any longer to pay tax and tribute to Jammu and threw off
its yoke." In return the Khokhars then assisted Malik Khusrau in his
attempt on Sialkot, whose garrison was befriended by the Jammú forces.**
The next notice of the Khokhars in the Tabaqát-z-Nasiri is an im-
portant one, and confirms the account of the Táj-ul-Ma'ásir. It de-
scribes the confusion which arose in the Sultan's dominions on account
of the rumour of his death, and states that the Khokhars (and other
tribes of the hills of Lahore and Júd) broke out in rebellion in 602 H.
and were defeated with great slaughter.tt In this rebellion the
Khokhars appear to have been in alliance with the Rái Sál, the ruler
of the Salt Range, or Koh-i-Júd, but it is not certain that Rái Sál
himself was a Khokhar.
* The following account is extracted from Elliot's History of India, çited as E. H. I.;
from the Tabagát.z. Násiri, Raverty's Translation, cited as T. N.; and from the latter writer's
Notes on Afghánistán..
+$. H. I., II, p. 447.
Ib. p. 209.
$ 16. p. 233.
| 16. p. 235.
Ib. p. 364.
** Tabagát-i-Násirí, p. 455; cf. p. 453, note 4 (Ruverty suggests that Manglán is
Makhiala).
# T. N. p. 481 ; cf, 604,



Khokhar history.
545
In 620 H. (1223 A. D.) the Sultan Jalál-ud-Din, driven from Ghazni
by the Chingiz Khan, who pursued him to the Indus, sought a refuge
in the Panjab. He occupied Balala and Nikala* near Lahore, and,
being too weak to advance on Delhi, sent a part of his army against
the hill Júd. This force defeated the Khokhar chief, and the Sultan
obtained his daughter in marriage, whereupon the Khokhar Ráit joined
him with a considerable body of his tribe.
The Khokhars had a long standing fend with Kubácha, governor of
Sindh (which then included the whole valley of the Indus below the
Salt Range), and the Sultán's troops, under the guidauce of the son of
the Khokhar chief, by a forced march, fell suddenly upon Kubácha's
camp near Uch and totally defeated him.
The Khokhars, however, do not appear to have been confined to the
country between the Jhelum and the Chénáb, but to have also held a
considerable tract east of the Beás (and the good horses to be obtained
in their talwandis or settlements are often mentioned), for in 698 A. H.
(1240 A. D.) we find them enlisted in the forces of the Sultána (Queen)
Ráziyyat and her consort Malik Ikhtiyár-ud-Din, Altunia, but they
abandoned her after her defeat at Kaithal. I
After the sack of Lahore by the Mughals in 1241-42 A. D., “ the
Khokhars and other Hindu Gabrs " seized it. $ And in 1246-47 A. D.,
the future Sultán Ghiyás-ud-Dín Balban was sent against the Rhokhars
into the Júd Hills and Jhelum.ll. The Khokhars were apparently
subjects of Jaspál, Sihrá. I
About this time Sher Khán reduced the Játs, Khokhars, Bhattis,
Mínís (Minás), and Mandáhars under his sway, ** apparently in or near
his fief of Sunám.
In 647 A. H. (1250 A. D.) the upper part of the Punjab appears to
bave been in the hands of the Mughals and Khokhars,tt but nothing
more appears to be heard of them until the reign of Muhammad Tughlaq
Shah, when they again began to be troublesome, and in 1342-43 A. D.
they revolted under their chief, Chandar. The governor of the Punjab,
Malik Tátár Khán, had to march against them, and though he was able
to subdue them for a time, they caused great disorders under the last
Tughlaq kings of Delhi.II.
We now come to the Tarikh-i-Mubarak Shahi, an imperfect manu-
ecript, the history in which has had to be completed from the Tabagát.
2-Akbari, which copied from it. According to this history, the Khokhar
chief Shaikháşs seized Lahore in 756 A. H. (1394 A. D.), and Prince
* Bankála or Mankála---E. H. I., II., p. 553 ; cf. 563.
† Called Kokár Sanká, who had embraced Solám in the time of Muhammad Ghort-Ib.
p. 563; T. N., p. 294. .
#T. N., pp. 647-8, notes.
$ 1b., p. 656 n.
ſ 16., p. 678; E. H. I., HI, p. 347.
IT. N., p. 815.
** Ib., p. 795.
tt 16., p. 822.
If Raverty's Notes, p. 367. Farishta turns Chandar into Haidar.-Brigg's Trans., I. 0.425
$$ Shaikhá was the general name by which the chiefs of the tribes styled themselves.'
because “ being Hindus by descent, they had become converts to Islám." Hence Jasrath
is often styled Jasrath Shaikhá.-Raverty's Notes, p. 367.



546
Khokhar history.
Humáyún, afterwards Sikandar Shah I, was to have been sent against
him* but his father, Muhammad Shah III, dying suddenly, he was too
occupied in securing the throne to set out on the expedition. Sikandar
Shah, however, only reigned some six weeks, and on his death Sultán
Mahmúd Shah II, succeeded him, but it was not for some wonths that
Sárang Khán could be nominated by him to the fief of Dibalpur and
entrusted with the war against Shaikhá. Sárang Khán took possession
of Dibálpur in June, and in September he advanced on Lahore with
the forces of Multán, and accompanied by the Bhagti and Main (Míná)
chiefs,t crossed the Sutlej at Tihára and the Beas at Dubáli. On hear-
ing of Sárang Khán's advance, Shaikhá Khokhar invaded the territory
of Dibálpur and laid siegs to Ajúdhan, but bearing that Sárang Khán
had passed Hindupat and was investing Lahore, he returned hastily to
that city and encountered Sárang Khán at Sámuthalla, 12 kos from it.
There he was defeated by Sárang Khan and fled to the hills of Júd,
while the victor took possession of Lahore. Four years later occurred
the grim interlude of Tímúr's invasion. Shaikhá, says the historian, out
of enmity to Sarang Khán, early joined Tímúr and acted as his guide,
in return for which he received mercy and honour, I but before Tímúr
left India he made Shaikhá prisoner, and with him all his wives and
childiul.
Accoruing to the histories of Tímár, however, the Khokhars played
a much more important part in the resistance offered to the invading
armies of Tímúr than the Tarikh-i-Mubárak-Shahí is inclined to admit.
In October 1398 A. D., Tímúr halted at Jál on the Beás, opposite
Shahpur, Here he learnt that Nusrat of the tribe of Khokhar was
established in a fortress on the banks of a lake. He attacked Nusrat,
and completely routed him, taking immense booty in cattle and burning
Nuscat's residence. Nusrat himself was slain. Some of his followers
escaped across the Beas, which Tímúr crossed, inarching from Sháh
Náwáz to Janján, a few days later. $ We next read of Malik Shaikhá or
Shaikh Kúkar, 'commander of the infidels,' who was defeated and slain
by Tímúr in the valley of Kúpila or Hardwar. The Zafarnáma, how.
ever, differs from this account. It mentions Alá-ud-Din as a deputy of
Shaikh Kúkarí, who was sent as an envoy to Kúpila, and describes
the advance of a Malik Shaikha as being misreported as the advance of
Shaikh Kúkarí, one of Tímúr's faithful adherents, a mistake which
enabled Malik Shaikhá to attack Tímúr unawares, though he was
promptly repulsed and killed. Then we hear of Tímúr's arrival at
Jammu on his homeward march. In its neighbourhood he captured
seven strongholds, belonging to the infidels, whose people had formerly
paid the jizya or poll-tax to the Sultan of Hindustán, but had for a long
time past cast off their allegiance. One of these forts belonged to Malik
Shaikh Kúkar, but, according to the Zafarnáma, the owner of this
* E. 8. I., IV, p. 272,
+ Ib., p. 29. Dibálpur is the ancient Deobálpur and the modern Dipálpur. Ajúdhan is
the modern Pákpattan.
$ E. H. 1., IV, p. 35. ::
$ E. H. I., III, pp 415.16.
1 16., pp. 455-6; cf. p. 510,
Ib;, p. 505,



Khokhar history.
547
stronghold was Shaiká, a relation of Malik Shaikh Kúkar* (or Shaikliá ....
Kúkarí), which possibly makes the matter clear :-Nusrat the Khokhar.
had been killed on the Beás after which his brother, Shaikhá, submitted
to Tímúr, and was employed by bim during his advance ou Delhi.t
The Malik Shaikhá killed at Kupilá was not a Khekhar at all, but in
Tímúr's Autobiography he has become confused with Malik Shaikhá the
Khokhar. Lastly, Malik Shaikhá had a relative, probably a Khokhar,
who held a little fort near Jammú. I
After his arrest by Tímúr, Shaikhá disappears from history; but in
823 A. H. (1420 A. D.), or some 22 years later, Jasrath (the son of)
Shaikhá makes his entrance on the scene. In that year the king of
Kashmír marched into Sindh, and was attacked by Jasrath, who de-
feated him, took him prisoner, and captured all his matériel. Elated
by this success, Jasrath, an independent rustic, began to have visions
about Delhi. Hearing that Khizr Khán (whom Timúr had left in
charge of Multán as his feudatory, and who had become Sultán of
Delhi in all but name) was dead, he crossed the Beas and Satlej, defeat-
ed the Mína leaders, and ravaged the country from Ludhiána to Arúbar
(Rupar).$ Thence he proceeded to Jalandhar, and encamped on the
Beás, while Zírąk Khán, the amír of Sáwána, retired into the fort.
After some negotiations it was agreed that the fort was to be evacuated
and given up to Túghán, the Turk-bacha (Jasrath's ally, who had taken
refuge in his territories), while Jasrath was to pay tribute and return
home. But as soon as Jasrath got Zárak Kháp into his camp, he de-
tained him as a prisoner and carried him, securely guarded, to
Ludhiána, whence he marched to Sirhind. That fortress, however,
defied all his attempts, and the Sultán Mubarak Shah, advancing, com-
pelled him to raise the siege and retreat on Ludhiana, whence, having
released Zírak Khán, he crossed the Sutlej. The Sultan's forces then
advanced as far as Ludhiána, but were unable to cross the Sutlej, as
Jasrath had secured all the boats. When the rains ceased, the Sultán
withdrew to Kabúlpur,ll arid Jasrath made a similar movement, where-
upon the Sultán sent a force to effect a crossing at Rupar. Jasroth
marched on a lipe parallel to this force, but it effected a crossing, and
the Sultán then passed the river without opposition. Jasrath's followers
then abandoned the opposition he had chosen without striking a blow,
and their leader fled hastily to Ludhiána, whence he crossed the Beas,
* According to the Malfúzát-i-Tímúri, Malik Shaikhá Khokhar was the brother of Nusrat
Khokhar, formerly governor of Lahore on the part of Sultan Mahmúd of Delhi. After
Nusrat's defeat Shaikhá Khokhar had submitted to Tímúr, and had accompanied him on
his march to the Jumna, his influence being sufficient for him to obtain protection for his
subjects from pillage by Tímúr's army. Shaikhá, however, obtained Tímúr's leave to
return to Lahore, where he soon incurred the suspicion of being lukewarm in Tímúr's cause
and Tímúr sent orders to arrest Shaikhá and levy a ransom from Lahore-E. H. I. III.
D. 473. This account is confirmed by the Zafarnáma, which calls Nusrat Kúkarí brother
of Shaikhá Kúkari-Ib., p. 485. Raverty states that some authorities say that Shaikhá died
a natural death, while others allege that he was put to death, Jasrath being imprisoned in
Samarqand. Some years later Jasrath was released acd returned home. There he put to
death Shahí, his brother, and, seizing. Jálandhar and Kalánaur, began to aspire to the
sovereignty of Hind.---Notes, p. 368.
+ E. H. I., III, p. 520.
* Ib., p. 467.
SE, H. 1., IV, p. 54. Raverty adds that he attacked Sirhind, but it was defended by
Sultán Shah Lodi and he failed to take it in 1421.--Notes, p. 368,
|| Kábulpur (Raverty).



548
Khokhar history.
the Rávi, and finally, after the Sultán had crossed the latter river near
Bhowa, * the Jánháva (Chenáb). Jasrath now took refuge in bis
strongest place, Tekhart in the hills but Rai Bhím I of Jammu guided
the Sultan's forces to the stronghold, and it was captured and destroyed.
Jasrath's power was, however, undiminished, for as soon as the Sultán
had returned to Delhi after restoring Lahore, he recrossed Chenáb and
Ráví with a large force of horse and foot, and attacked Lahore and was
only driven off after nearly five weeks' fighting round the fort. He
then retreated on Kalánaur to attack that stronghold, into which Rai
Bhim had tbrown himself in order to reliere Lahore. After protracted
Sghting round Kalánaur, Jasrath patched up & truco with Rai Bhim
and then went towards the Ráví where he collected all the people of
the territory of the Khokhars, who were in alliance with him, but on
the advance of an imperial army from Lahore, supported by one which
advanced on the ford of Buhi, he again fled to Tekhar. The united
forces of the Sultán now marched along the river Ravi and crossed it
between Kalánanr and Bhoh* afterwards effectioga junction with
Rái Bhím on the confines of Jammú. These forces' defeated some
Khokhars who had separated from Jasrath or the Chenab.
In the following year (826 4. H. or 1423 A, D.) Jasrath defeated
! Rai Bhím and captured most of his horses and matériel. The Rái him-
self was killed, and Jasrath now united himself to a small army of
Maghals and invaded the territories of Dibálpur and Lahore, but on the
advance of the imperial leader he retired across the Chenáb.
After this the Khokhars appear to have remained inactive for four
or five years, but in 831 A, H. (1428 A. D.) Jasrath laid siege to
Kalánaur, and on advancing from Lahore to relieve the place, his old
opponent, Sikandar Tuhfa, was defeated and had to retreat on Lahore.
Jasrath then besieged Jálandhar, but he was unable to reduce it, and so
he retreated to Kalánaur, carrying off the people of the neighbourhood
as captives. Reinforcements were sent to Sikandar, but before they
arrived, he had again advanced to Kalánaur and united bis forces with
those of Rái Ghalib of that town. These leaders then marched after
Jasrath and completely defeated him at Kángra on the Beas, recovering
the spoils which he had gained at Jálandhar. Jasrath again took refuge
in Tekhar.
In 835 A. H. (1431-2 A.D.), however, Jasrath descended from Telhar
(Tekhar) and marched on Jálandhar, Sikandar drew out of Lahore to
intercept him, but incautiously allowed his small force to be attacked
by Jasrath's superior numbers and was defeated and taken prisoner,
some of his followers escaping to Jálandhar. Jasrath in triumph
marched on Lahore and laid siege to it, but it was vigorously defended
* Not identified ; possibly Bhowa and Bheh are the same.
+ Thankar or Talhar in other historians. Farishta has Bisal, but that is on the Ravi.
Raverty calls it Thankir. - E. H. I., IV, pp. 55-6.
Raverty calls this Hindu Rájá of Jammu Rai Bhalín, but adds that he was son-in-law
of Ali Shah of Kashmir, against whom Zain-ul-Abidín, his brother, enlisted Jasrath's aid.
The Khokhars and their ally marched from Sialkot against the Sultán, Ali Shah, and
defeated him prior to 1423 å. D. About this time the Gakkhařs, under Malik Kad, wrested
their conquests from Zain-ul-Abidin.



-
Khor-Khoreja.
549
by Sikandar's lieutenants, and on the Sultan's advancing to Sámána to
its relief, he abandoned the siege, but kept Sikandar in captivity.*
In 835 A. H. (1432 A. D.) Malik Allahdad was appointed feudatory
of Lahore, but he was promptly attacked on his arrival at Jalandhar
by Jasrath, defeated and compelled to seek a refuge in the hills of
Kothí.t
In 840 A. H. (1436 A. D.) the Soltán Muhammad Shah sent an
expedition against Shaikhá (sic) Khokhar, which ravaged his
territories: I
In 845 A. H. (1441 A. D.) the Sultán conferred Dibálpur avd Lahore
on Bahlol Khan and sent him against Jasrath, but Jusrath made peace
with him and flattered him with hopes of the throne of Delhi.§ After
this the Khokhar power declined, owing to cansos of which we know
nothing.
In the time of Akbar the Khokhars held 5 out of 52 mahalls in the
Lahore sarkár in the Bárí Doáb, and 7 out of 21 parganas in the
Chinhath Doab, with one maháll each in the Bíst-Jalandhar and
Rachna Doábs. In the Dibálpur sarkár of Multán they held 3 out of
10 mahalls in the Bist-Jalandhar Doáb, and one in the Berún-i-Punjnad,
west of the Indus. Raverty puts their population then at more
than 200,000 souls.||
It must be confessed that the above notes leave the question of the
origin of the Khokhars precisely where it stood. In an account of the
KATIL Rájputs from Gurdaspur it is said that some of the earliest)
converts to Islám became known as Khokhars, but further on it says:
« One of our ancestors settled in the fort of Mangla Davi in the Jammu
State and then took possession of Kharipur. Hence his descendants
became known as Khokhars," after being converted to Islám. in the
time of Mahmúd of Ghazni. And further on it says that Kátils
do not intermarry with Khokhars, because the latter are of their blood,
and are descendants of Kátils by Muhammadan wives:
(2) a section of the Chuhộás which is said to be descended from a
Khokhar Rajput whose son was born of his mother in her grave. He
was rescued, but as he had sucked the breasts of a corpse he was out-
casted and married the daughter of a Chúhța. Out of respect for its
ancestress the Khokhar Chuhrás do not eat the heart of any animal.
Kaoş, Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KHOREJA, a Ját clan (agricultoral) found in Multán.
State and thencestors settled in as Khokhar that some of thant of the
* E, H. I., IV., p. 74.
† 16. p. 75.
* Ib., p. 85: Jasrath must be meant.
§ 16., pp. 85.6.
ů Notes, pp. 366.67. The Khokhars of the Jalandhar district do not mention Jasrath,
buí only date their settlement there from the time of the Sayyid kings. Mr. Purser
Tullundur Settlement Report, p. 14;) says this is negative evidence that Jasrath was a
Gakkhar, but he refers to Major Waterfield's Gujrat Settlement Report, in which the Kho.
khärs are quite correctly put down as descended from Jasrath, “who, with Bharat, took
Jammu when in Tímúr's service," and afterwards settled in the Gujrát district. See
Punjab Notes and Queries, I., p. 141.



550
Rhosa-Khotre.
.
.
.
.
daslari
Khosa, (1) a very important Baloch tribe forming two distinct tumans--
one near Jacobábád in Upper Sindh, the other with its head-quarters at
Bátil near Dera Gházi Khán. Said to be mainly Hot by descent, they
occupy the country between the Laghári and the Kasráni, their terri-
tory being divided into a northern and a southern portion by the terri-
tory of the Lunds, and stretching from the foot of the hills nearly across
to the river. They are said to have settled originally in Kech; but
with the exception of a certain number in Baháwalpur they are, so
far as the Punjab is concerned, only found in Dera Gházi. They hold,
however, extensive lands in Sindh, which were granted them by
Hunáyún in return for military service. They are one of the most
powerful tribes on the border, and very independent of their chief,
and are “ admitted to be among the bravest of the Baloch.” They are
true Rinds and are divided in Dera Gházi into 13 clans, of which the
Balelár'i and Isiáni-are the most important, the latter being an
affiliated offshoot of the Khetráns. The others are the Jangel, Jindani,
Jíání, Jarwár, Hamaláni, Tombíwálá, Mihrwáni, Hálti, Jajela,* Lashári
and Umaráni. The Khosa is the most industrious of the organised
tribes; and at the same time the one which next to the Gurcháni bears
the worst character for lawlessness. In 1859 Major Pollock wrote:
“ It is rare to find a Khosa who has not been in prison for cattle-
stealing, or deserved to be ; and a Khosa who has not committed a
murder or debauched his neighbour's wife or destroyed his neighbour's
landmark is a decidedly creditable specimen.” And even now the
description is not very much exaggerated.
There is also a Khosa sub-tuman of the Rinds of Shorán, and a
Khosa 'clan of the Lunds of Tibbi.
(2) : tribe of Játs, said to be of Tur Rájpat origin and to have
been expelled from Delhi by the Chauhans. The people so plundered
were called Khosas. t They used to wear the janeo, but after contract-
ing unions with Játs they gave it up, except at Rattiar in Moga
tahsil in Ferozepur, where the Khosas still wear it, avoiding social inter-
course with other Khosas. The Khosas hold the title in reverence
because in the fight from Delhi an eagle saved a new-born child
in the usual way. At weddings bread is still thrown to kites. The
boy's name was Bhai Randhír and Khosa Randhír in Moga is named
after him. His pood in this village is the scene of a mela beld there
in Mágh and all Khosas have their wishes fulfilled or fulfil their
vows there. Another special custom at Khosa weddings is that when
the bride reaches the bridegroom's house the Dúm conceals the takkula
of a spinning wheel in the village dung-heaps, and the pair are made
to search for it by the common till they find it.
KHOSAK, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KHOSAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
KuostwÁL, an inhabitant of Khost in Afghánistán. The Khostwáls are not
a tribe but include a number of Pathán tribes, such as the Jájís.
KHOTRE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
* A small clan, probably aborigines of the Jaj valley, which they inhabit.
† The more usual folk etymology makes Khosa = plunderer, not plunderod,



Khudakka-Kingar.
551
KHUDAKKA, à sept or family of Pathans descended from Khudá Dád Khan,
son of Khizr Khán (ancestor of the Khizr Khel), and grandson of
Saddu Kbán, founder of the Saddozais. The family is chiefly found
in Multán.
KAUDUKŅEL, a branch of the Doozai clan of the Mandaur Patháns, settled on
the Indus in Peshawar round Panjtar,
KAOGIÁNI, see KHOGIÁNI.
KHUKHRAIŅ, see KHOKHABAIN.
KAUMRA (KJEMRA!.-A caste of Hindustán; and found only in the eastern
parts of the Punjab. His trade is dealing in and chipping the stones
of the hand-mills used in each family to grind flour; work which is
believed to be generally done by Tarkháns in the Punjab proper.
Every year these men may be seen travelling up the Grand Trunk
Road, driving buffaloes which drag behind them millstones loosely
cemented together for convenience of carriage. The millstones are
brought from the neighbourhood of Agra, and the men deal in a
small way in buffaloes. They also sing at fairs, and in Karnál work as
weavers. They are almost all Musalmán.
KHUNGA, one of the principal Ját clans, by position and influence in
Hoshiarpur, in which District it is found in and near Budhipind.
KAUSRÁ, an eunuch or hermaphrodite : see under Hinjrá.
KBÚTRÍL, a tribe which is found in the Kahúta, Gujar Khan and Rawal.
pindi tahsils of Ráwalpindi, and is connected by descent with the
Dhúnds and Jasgams of the Murree Hills.
KEWAJA, a title, especially affected by Kashmírís. It is the same word,
as KHOJA, but is not used as the name of any caste or otherwise than
as a title.
KAWAJAZADA, see SAYYID.
KHYUNG-PO, see CHÁBZANG.
KIATRÁN, KIHTRÁRN, a sept of the Miána Patháns, descended from Kihtrán.
one of the two sons of Shkorn, son of Miánai: Raverty distinguisheg
them from the Kihtráns or KAETRÁNS.
KÍKAN, one of the two main divisions of the Sánsis. Also known as
Bhedkuţ, the Kíkan are cattle-lifters, child-stealers, burglars, and some-
times robbers and dacoits. They pass themselves off as Nats and
other harmless tribes to escape molestation. They will eat beef and
buffalo meat. Sometimes they are called rihlúwálas by the people as
their women dance and sing rilhus, ditties or love-songs.
Kilcor, a clan of the Manj Rájputs.
KILLA, & tribe of Játs which claims Solar Rájput origin through its
eponym. It migrated into the Punjab in Humáyún's time and is found
in Sialkot.
KINGAR, see KANGAR.



552
Kirár-Kohistani.
KIRÁş, fem. -í, a word almost synonymous with coward, and even more
contemptuous than is the name Bányá in the east of the Province.
The term appears to be applied to all the wesiern or Punjabi traders
as distinct from the Bányás of Hindustán, and is so used even in
the Kángra hills. But the Arorá is the person to whom the term is
most commonly applied, and Khatris repudiate the nane altogether
as derogatory. The Kírar appears as a terrible coward in the proverbs
of the countryside : “ The thieves were four and we eighty-four; the
thieves came on and we ran away. Damn the thieves ! well done us!”
And again : “ To meet a Ráthi armed with a hoe makes a company of
nine Kirárs feel alone." Yet the poasant has a wholesome dread of
the Kiráf when in his proper place. “Ves not the Ját in his inngle,
or the Kiráf at his shop, or the boatman at his ferry; for if you do,
they will break your head.” Again : “ Trust not a crow, a dog, or a
Kiráſ, even asleep.” So again : “ You can't make a friend of a
Kiráç any more than a satti of a prostitute.”
KIRAUNK, KARAUNK, KRAUNK, KIRÁwak, a man wbose duty it is to call
people together for begár or forced labour; also called Satwaq or
bearer of burdens. Lyall speaks of the Kirank as one of the nich or
inferior castes of Hindus in Kángļa, but it is doubtful whether it is
not rather an occupational term, applied to any Koli or Dági who
adopts this calling. In the Simla Hills the term Karawak is generally
applied to a Koli, but in the Koti fief of Keonthal there are two
villages where Karáwaks live and form a distinct caste, ranking higher
than the Kolis. These were originally Kanets. Once a cow died in a
cow-shed and there being no Dági or Koli present, a Kanet dragged
its carcass out of the house. The Kanets outcasted him and his
descendants are called Karáwaks. The Kanets do not intermarry or
dine with them. They can enter a Kanet's house but must not go into
the kitchen. They correspond to the Batwáls, Balábar, etc., of the low
hills and the plains.
KIRD, KURD, a powerful Brahoi tribe : found also as a clan in the Mazári
Baloch tribe. Originally a slave tribe.
KIRMÁNÍ, & Sayyid clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KIBÆTIBán, a boat driver, a boatman : see under MALLÁH.
KIZAlbása, see Qizzilbáse.
Koch. & people mentioned in the Masálik-wa-Mamálik and in the Ritáb of
Ibn Haukal with the BALOCH. They are described as inhabiting a
territory of Irán Zamín bordering on Sind and Hind, and as speaking
a language different from the Baloch. Raverty identified them with
the Brahuis, but see Kochi, infra.
Kochi, a synonym for Powinda, q.v. The word literally means ' nomad.'
Kodan, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Konár, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KOHISTÁNI, a generic term for the peoples of the Indus Kohistán: see under
Chiliss, Gabare.



558
Kohja-Koli.
KOHJÁ, 'defective in a member,'* more correctly Khoja.
KOHJA.- In the Jullundur tahsil, the first Játs to become Musalmans would
seem to bave been the Kaujas or Kohjas who hold five villages ; one
of which is called Kauja, where the Kingra cho enters the District.
They say their ancestor was a giant who accompanied Sultan Mahmúd
of Ghazni in one of his invasions and settled down here as be liked the
country. His name was Ali Muhammad or Manju, and he was nick-
named Koh-Cha, or "little mountain,' on account of his size. The
change from Koh-cha to Kauja or Kohja is simple. Six of their
septs (the Sim, Sadhu, Arak, Sin, Dhapoe, and Khunkhun) claim to
be of Arab descent, and so were originally Muhammadans. The others
were converted at various times since the reign of Akbar. The above
mentioned six septs at least intermarry on equal terms. The Kohjas
avoid the use of beef and till lately observed Hindu rites, as well as
the Muhammadan nikáh, at weddings. They sank to Ját status by
marrying Ját women.
Kohlí, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
KOHLI, a man, of any caste, who looks after the kuhls or irrigation
channels in Chambá. Not to be confused with Koli.
KOARI, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Kok, a small clan of Jáțs found in Báwal (Nábha). It derives its name
from its first home, Kokás in the Mandáwar tahsil of Alwar. The
Koks ordinarily worship the goddess Bhairon, and perform the first
tonsure of their children at Durga's shrine in the Dahmi ilága of
Alwar. Cf. Kuk.
Kokáraz, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán). Cf. Kúkára.
Kokrárá, a tribe of Játs.
KOLÁ, an inhabitant of Kullu, and, according to Sir Denzil Ibbotson, a
distinct word from KÓLI, vide p. 218 supra. The form Kolá is
probably correct, just as Láhulá is used outside Láhul in Kulla for an
inbabitant of Láhul.
KOLI.-The term Koli is used in three distinct senses. First, as a territorial
term it denotes a resident of Kullu, and Lyall spraks of the Rájás of
Kullu as Koli Rájás.t He adds that the name Koli is applied, out
of Kullu, to any Kullu man, but KOLÁ would appear to be the more
correct form. He observes that they were not of pure Rajput blood,
& fact indicated by their use of the title Singh instead of Sen or
Pál, the usual Rájput affix, and that they were probably Kanets by
crigin, popular tradition making them for some time petty Țbákurs or
barons of the upper Kullu valley. I Second, it denotes the Kolis of the
Hills, who is practically the same as the Dági, or in Chambá as the
SIPPI. Third, it is used of the Chamárs in the south-east Panjab who
have taken to weaving. The Koli of the plains belong in all probability
UU
The terun Koli residente adds thout world map pure et de son bos
* Punjabi Dicty., p. 622.
† Kángra Settlemer.t Rep., $ 79.
Ibid, p. 76.
Koli is often given as a Kájput sopt or family.



334
Koli groups.
to the great Kori or Koli tribe of the Chamárs, the head-quarters
of which is in Oudh. These men are commonly classed with Chamára
in the districts in which they are found, but are distinguished from
the indigenous Chamárs by the fact of their weaving only, and doing
no leather work. Indeed they are commonly known as Chamár Juláhás.
Mr. Benton wrote: “The Chamár-Julábás have no share in the village
skins, and do no menial service ; but they would be very glad to be
entered among the village Chamárs, who have anticipated them
and driven them to weaving as an occupation.". I very much doubt
whether this is generally true. As a rule the substitution of weaving
for leather work is made voluntarily, and denotes a distinct rise in
the social scale. Tho Karnál Kolis do not obtain the services of
Brahmans.
ney
winposed to be denne Dagi caste is said to be vettle (dangar or
It is, however, very possible that the Kolis of the hills are identical
with those of the plains, or that both are really so named because
they follow the same callings. Thus in the Simla Hills, the term
Koli is supposed to be derived from Kulin, degraded from a family,'
i.e., of Sudra status ; and the Dági caste is said to be an offshoot of the
Kolis, which got its name from dragging away dead cattle (dangar or
daga), so that a Koli who took to removing the carcases of cattle was
called a Dági Koli. Neither Kolis nor Dágis may wear a gold ornament*
or a sihrá (chaplet) at a wedding in those Hills, but in the Siwáliks and
lower Himalayas Kolis may wear both, though Chamárs may not.
Again Dágis and Chamárs may intermarry, as a Dági who makes
shoes becomes a Chamár, Otherwise be remains a Dági. Yet tbe
Kolis rank above the Chamárs or Dágis and in the lower Hinalayas
a Kanet will drink water from a Koli's brass vessel, but not from
any earthen vessel of his. These appear to be the Sácha or pure'
Kolis of the following note :
Once upon a time, when the Simla Hills were occupied by Kanets, cattle disease carried
off nearly all the cattle of the villagers. As no shoe-makers (Chamárs) were available to
remove the countless dead kine, and as the villagers could take no food till the carcases
were removed from their houses, they took counsel to get out of the difficulty they were in,
and some Kanet families undertook to remove them, but these families were avoided by the
other Kanets, as they were polluted by touching the dead kine, and were termed Kolis.
Thus the Kolis are degraded Kanets. But they retain their gols, so that the Koli gots are the
same as those of the Kanets, and some Kolis of the Shandilya and Káshyap gots are found in
these hills. Bolis do not touch beef. But they gladly eat the flesh of a male buffalo offered
to a goddess in sacrifice. They also freely eat the flash of a black bear. There are no
Sachå Kolis in the Simla Hills, f but only Suchá Kolís. The Paháți word suchá means pure
or purified, from the Sanskr. Shuchi, pure, purified or clean. They are like the Jhínwars
of the plains, and water may be taken from their hands. The Kolí deity is called Khathe.
shar.
# This prohibition would appear to be due to some old sumptuary law of the Rájás.
Similarly, at funerals Kolis makes use the dholki (drum) and sanái (pipe), but no othors:
Kanets may use any musical instruments except the narsingha.- and even that may be used
by permission. In the higher ranges it is customary to beat a drum at funerals, but in the
lower the dafra, sankh and jhallar are used.
+ On the other hand a very careful observer (Mr. W. Coldstream), wrote :--
os in the lower hills (at least I have seen them in Bilaspur State) there are sachá Rolls.
from whose hands Rajputs and Miáns can eat and drink. The fact is that the necessity of
having menials ceremonially pure has created these Sacbá Kolís, for Jhínwars and Brah.
mans are not everywhere to be got to supply food and drink, especially in the lower hills.
The colonies of Sachá Kolis I saw were near forts, and they served the garrison (as water.
carriers, etc.)"



The Kolis of the hills.
555
In the Simla Hills another story about the origin of the Kolis is that
a Kanet father had two sons by two wives and divided his property
between them, it being agreed on that who should be the first to
plough in the morning should get the first share. The younger brother
was the first to wake and went forth to plough. The elder waking
and finding him gone attempted to plough the courtyard, but finding it
too narrow in a passion killed the bullock with an axe. For this he
was turned out of his caste. He had two sons, one of whom lived a
respectable life, while the other was guilty of skinning and eating
dead oxen. From the first son descended the Kolis, who generally do
no medial work, the Kanets will drink but not intermarry with them.
From the second son are descended the Dagolis who skin and eat
dead cattle. They are further sub-divided into Dagoli and Thákur of
whom the former will not eat with the latter because they eat and
drink with Muhammadans. And between the Kolis and Dagolis come
the Dúms who are considered below the Kolis and above the Dagolis,
and though they do not bury or eat cattle the Kanets will not drink
with them. They are endogamous.
In Kumhársain the Kolis appear to be divided into three classes,
of which two may wear gold and intermarry,* wbile the third is
not allowed to do so and forms a separate sub-caste, called Bashirrú,
Karrirú and (or) Shilú, which is very numeroas in Kullu. The
Bashirrú are closely allied with the Jihotra group, but the people of
Kumhársain will not eat anything cooked by them, though the Kolis of
Sirmúr do not appear to object to doing so.
But another account divides the Kolis of the Simla Hills into two
classes : (i) those who do no menial work, and with whom Kanets
will drink (but not marry), and (ii) the Dagolis who skin dead kine and
eat beef. And the latter again have a sub-group called Rahert who
will eat and drink with Muhammadans and so are out-casted even by
the Dagolis. The Dúms rank between the Kolis and the Dagolis.
In Kullu the Dági is commonly styled Koli, or, in Saráj, Betu.I
But those Kolis who have taken to any particular trade are called
by the trade name, e.g., bárárú, basket maker; barhye, carpenter;
daugri, iron-smelter ; pumbe, wool cleaner; and these names stick
to families long after they have abandoned the trade, as have been the
case with certain families now pamed Smith and Carpenter in
England. So also Chamárs and Lohárs, though they have been
classed separately, or probably only Dágis (Kolis) who took to those
* Only those whose hereditary occupation is tailoring are allowed to wear gold -not even
those who have recently adopted it.
† The Raher in these hills are like the sweepers or Bhangís of the plains.
I (Bethu or baithu, a low-caste (Dági) attendant on a Kanet (or upper class family:
Diack's Kulu Dialect of Hindi, p. 51.]. On the other hand the majority of the low castes
in Kullu were in 1891 returned as Dágis in Kullu proper (the Kullu tahsil) and as Kolia in
Saráj, and the terms appear to be synonymous though the latter is preferred as implying
no reproach. Besides the derivation from dág, cattle, Dági is also said to be derived from
dagná to fell. Neither dág nor dagná is given by Diack, op. cit.
$ In Kullu the higher castes are styled Mítarká (derived from bhitar-ká, of the inner
circle'), while the lower are called Bárká, of the outer circle'. The latter include the.
Tháwi or carpenter, Darehi, ferryman, Koli or Dági and Barehi or axeman, Lohár and
Bárſa (or Bálſá), an ironsmelter or worker in nirgál, and Chamár in the order given : Kullu
Gaxetter, 1897, p. 61, ,



556
The Kolis as clients.
.
trades; but at the present day other Dágís will not eat with the
Lohárs, and in some parts they will not eat or intermarry with the
Chamárs. Most Dagis will eat the flesh of bears, leopards, or
langár monkeys. All except the Lohárs eat the flesh of cattle who
have died a natural death. They stand in a subordinate position to
the Kanets, though they do not hold their lands of them. Certain
families of Dågís, Chamárs, and Lohárs are said to be the koridárs,
a.e., 'the courtyard people of certain Kanet families.* When a Kanet
dies, his heirs call the koridár Dágís through their jatai or headmen :
they bring in fuel for the funeral pile and funeral feast, wood for
torches, play the pipes and drums in the funeral procession, and do
other services, in return for which they get food and the kiria or
funeral perquisites. The dead bodies of cattle are another perquisite
of the Dágís, but they share them with the Chamárs : the latter take
the skin, and all divide the flesh. . The Dágís carry palanquins when
used at marriages.' The Lohárs and Chamárs also do work in iron
and leather for the Kanets, and are paid by certain grain allowances.
The dress of the Dágís does not differ materially from that of the
Kanets, except in being generally coarser in material and scantier
in shape. Their mode of life is also much the same.
Sir James Lyall has the following instructive passage on the
evolution of the Koli, but he frankly acknowledges that popular
ethnology, which almost invariably describes a low as formed from
a higher caste by degradation, is not on his side :-
" From the natural evolution of caste distinctions in this direction, I would reason that
once all the lower castes in Kullu ate the flesh of cattle, but as Hindu ideas got a firmer
tooting, the better off refrained and applied to themselves the name of Koli.t Popular tra.
dition seems, however, to go in the opposite direction, for according to it the Kolís came
from Hindustan and gradually fell to their present low position. The real Kolí, or as he is
called in Kullu the Sachcha Koli, is found in Kotlehr, Lambagraon, etc., of Kángra proper.
There the caste is also very low, but tradition ascribes to it a much higher position than it
now holds. The Kolís of Kángļa will not have intercourse with the Kolís of Kullu on equal
terms: the latter admit their inferiority and ascribe it to their being defiled by touching
flesh. But it is the same with Brahmans of the plains and of the hills ; they will not inter.
marry.
“I am not aware what position the Kolís of Kangļa hold to the Chanáls of Kángra, but I
believe they are considered inferior to them, and that they will not eat together nor intor.
marry. The Chanáls of Kangra will not, I understand, touch dead cattle, and will not mix
on ecual terms with those that do. There are some Chanáls in Outer Saraj who are con.
sidered inferior to the Kolís there."
* The Kullu Gazetter of 1897 gives a somewhat different version. It describes the Kolis
or Dá gis as notoriously lazy, ignorant and thriftless. In dress and customs they do not
differ materially from Kanets, except that they are generally poorer and havo no casto
sorunleg. Each family is attached to a family of Kanets for whom they perform the cus-
tomary menial services on the occasion of a birth, a marriage or a death, receiving in roturn
the learings of the ceremonial feasts, and also certain allowances at harvest timo: this re-
lationship is known as that of kasain (the Kanet) and dhani, -háru or kholidár (the Dági).
Diack adds that the Dági family has the sole right of performing ceremonial functions, e.g.,
at a funeral, such as can only be undertaken by persons of low caste : op. cit., p. 51He":
translates dhani 38 'master'. For the term kasain we may perhaps compare kasán in
Ludhiana.
+ But supplementary to and contradictory of this view is the account given in the
Mandi Stato Gazetteer, p. 30. According to that authority the Kolis claim Kanot origin
and say that the offspring of a Kanet by a low-caste woman is called a Koli. They
perform menial services for Kanet landholders at festivities and are also cultivatorg.
but are all notoriously lazy. The Chanáls form a branch of the Kolis, but are inforior
to them in rank and live by extracting oil and carrying loads on ponies. The Chanál gote
are Lakkar, Chauhan, Takriál, Sjyáhi. Mhotla, Dhorúng and Kathwári. No Koli gote are
montioned.



Koli Krishni.
857
Thus the Koli is found as far west as Chambá, throughout the Hindu
States of the North-east Punjab, in Kángļa and the Siwaliks. He
is also found in Sirmúr to the eastward, and in that State he occupies
a low position, below the Lohár, Bídi and Bájgi, but above the
Chanal and Dúmrá. He must not let his shadow fall upon any person
of high caste, and cis-Giri Kanets and Bháts will not even drink
water touched by him. Yet these two castes and even Rajputs will
drink freely water brought by him in a metal vesseland can prepare their
food in his house if it has been fresh plastered with cow.dung. The
term Koli is almost synonymous with serf,' and at weddings Kolis
go on foot or on ponies, but not use palanquins or a kettledrum
(naqára).* Ritual marriage is indeed not solemnised among some of
them, the jhajra form being often used or merely the simple rite
of patting a nose-ring into the bride's nose.f
KOLI, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KORÁ, the term for a Kori, said to be in use in Simla.
KORÁI, KAudi, Kúrar. One of the original main sections of the Baloch, but
not now an organised tuman. It is found wherever the Baloch have
spread in the Punjab, and still forms a tribe in Mekrán. Most of the
Baloch in Multán are either Korái or Rind, but they have long been,
for practical purposes, Játs, having forgotten their old language,
disused their old costume and intermarried freely with the neighbour-
ing population, though they not uncommonly continue to wear their
hair long. The Kúrai form one of the five Baloch tribes represented
in the Chenab Colony.
KURAIS, -88, Koraishi, Koraisi, see QURAISH.
KORE, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KORE8hí, an agricultural clan found in Montgomery. See Quraish.
KORI, KOHRÍ, (Kwari is probably a misspelling for Korí). The Koris are
Hindustání Chamárs, but are looked on more or less as a separate
caste in the Punjab : see under Koli.
KORYE, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Koráwá, see Kutáná.
KOTLA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
KOTLERRIA, a Rajput sept of the 1st grade deriving its name from the
principality of Kotlehr.
KRAMMIN, fr. Pers. kamin or (according to Drew) fr. krum, work : a class
of millors and potters, most numerous in Darel, but also found in the
fertile valley of Tangir in the Indus Kohistán.
KRISHNI, a Hindu Vaishnava sect. Members of the Krishní sect properly
so called, will commence every sentence of their talk with the word
Krishn. Other devotees of this hero salute each other with the words
# Sirmúr Gazetteer, pp. 31, 84 and 36.
† Ibid, p. 30.
f Ibbetson i$ 389) speaks of the Korai, as Rind but in § 385 he quotes an old Biloch verso
as The Hot and Korai are joined together, they are equal with the Rind." Tho Korai Dover
appear to have exercised indopondont rule.



558
Kubhár-Kuchband.
jai Sri Kishn. Victory to the holy Krishna,' instead of using the
ordinary Rám, Rám.' Others will ase only the words jai Gopálji,
• Victory to the herdsman.' And there is a sect known as the Jai.
kishoí 'who worship none but Krishn, and are remarkable for the
combination they present of the extreme Shaiva and Vaishnava prac-
tices. They are said to have been founded by Muní Ditatre* to be
connected closely with the Sanissís, or even to be a sect of the Bám.
márgís, to be recruited from both sexes and to worship nude before the
image of their god. On the other hand, they are devoted to the holy
places of the Vaishnavas, to Gobardhan, Mathra, the Godávarí, and all
that has to do with the history of Krishn : they read the Bhagavat
Gíta ; they are scrupulous observers of the sanctity of animal life; they
are even reported to bave been originally a Jain community, and to
have only gradually adopted the ordinary Hindu customs relating to
marriage and the like. In Lahore they are known as Bai; and their
priests wear salmon-coloured clothes and white scall-caps, with flaps
over the ears. They reverence more especially the Narbada and the
deity Chang Dev, whose shrine is on or near that river; they worship
his statue, which resembles that of Krishn and which is made of black
wood or stone, and on the head of which they keep & small stone
brought from the Narbada hills. At the time of prayer males and
females alike are said to divest themselves of their clothes and to wor.
ship thus the image which only the initiated know to be that of Chang
Dev and not of Krishn. They keep a handkerchief in their temple
which is called sesh, and with which every one who enters the temple,
wipes his or her hands. They are given to the practice of cbarms
and will neither reside nor eat anything near a Hindu temple.
RUBHÁR, . q. Kumhár, in Jhelum.
KUBRÁ, a sept of Baloch. (M.).
KUCHARS, (1) a got of Mírásís, attached to the Malhi Játs ; (2) a got of the
Khatris.
KUCHBAND, lit. brush-binder.' The term is not a generic name, but
an occupational one. The Kuchbands settled in Hissár say that their
place of origin is Chitor in Rajputána, and that, during some catastro-
phe, vaguely stated to have occurred some two or three centuries ago,
some tribes migrated north and assumed this designation and calling.
The Kuchband gots are-Chauhan, Punwar, Gablot, Káchwa, Banáns,
Sulankbi or Solkhi, Súrbia, Sassaud, Badgujar, and Morwár. They
learnt brush-making from Chaugar, and their women also acquired
the art of baking toys of clay. In Hoshiarpur the Kuchbands are
regarded as Kanjars by others, but say themselves that they are
Ghárás; and in that District their gots are Súd, Batwár, Bes, skașhára,
Sankal, Bagúhar and Sonrá. No longer nomads they are now more
or less settled, especially in the suburbs of Delhi, and in the canton-
ments of Ambála and Mathra. At Ambála they intermarry with Sánsis
WA
* The Saniásís often trace their order to Swamt Ditatre, the Muní Dattatreya of Sanskrit
works, who is som :timis said to have been the precursor of Shankar Acháraj, and all
Saniasis, it is said, receive the mantra in the name of Ditatre. There is, however, &
story of a contest between this Muni and Guru Gorakh Nath, which would place the formor
at a date much later than Shankar Acháraj and either this Ditatre or another of the samo
name is looked on as the founder of the Jaikishni sect.



The Kuchbands.
559
and Kanjars from the Phulkián States, whence they came. They earn a
living as shikáris, makers of khas khas screens and even as domestic ser-
vants in cantonments. Their women also make and sell binnás (cushions
for carrying loads on the head) and chinkás (nets forhanging up food, etc.,
in) and even as prostitutes. But as a tribe they are no longer criminai.
Calling themselves Hindus, their observances are all like those in
vogue among Hindus. Sweeper women are employed as midwives,
at a fee of annas 4 for a boy and 2 for a girl. The birth of a boy
is celebrated by the distribution of sugar.
No Kuchband may inarry within his own clan, and, as the Punwar
and Surankhi stand highest in the social scale, it is considered an
honour to intermarry with them. Marriage is contracted in this
way: At betrothal, the parents of the bridegroom present five
rupees to the bride's family ; this is the whole ceremony.* At the
wedding, a pole is fixed upright in the ground and a burning coal
placed at its foot. A brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, of either the
bride or bridegroom binds the right-hand thumb of the one to the thumb
of the left hand of the other, and the couple circle round the pole seven
times and afterwards blow seven times on to the coals. Then the bride.
groom takes the bride into his thatch or tent, and unties the knot, in-
forming her at the time that it is his tent and her future shelter.
The bride returns to her parents.
The mukláwa, or home-coming, is performed in this wise. When
the pakkhís are struck and the tribe starts on a tour, the bridegroom,
accompanied by a panch of two men as witnesses, goes to the bride's
residence and there presents Rs. 20 to her parents. He is then
allowed to pass one night under his father-in-law's roof and next day
takes his bride home, the bridegroom's two witnesses exborting the pair
on their duty towards each other. A second, or karewa, marriage is
very rarely resorted to. The bridegroom never mentions the name
of his mother-in-law.
When a death occurs, the corpse is carried on a bier of bamboos,
shaped like a ladder, to the Hindu burning place. They do not
collect any of the ashes (phúl) after the body is burnt. Three days
later the deceased's near relations and those who carried tbe bier go
to the burning place and convey with them a small quantity of milk.
The ashes aro collected in one place and the milk sprinkled on them.
On the 12th day the corpse bearers are fed with rice and sugar and
the rempant is distributed.
. Although these Kuchbands style themselves Hindús they will eat
food cooked by almost any caste. Cow's flesh alone is abjured by them.
Of wild animals they catch and snare jackal, lizards (sánda), iguanas,
foxes, porcupines, pig, hares, deer, and consume the flesh of all of them,
* In Hoshiarpur two emissaries of the boy's father go to the bride's house and are
givon liquor. In return they distribute two rupees worth of sweetmeats and so confirm
the betrothal. A marriage letter is sent as among Hindus, to fix the data for the
Shampooing of the pair with whatná. The pherás at the wedding are made by the boy's
gister or sister's daughter or by the girls. But the couple blow on to tho fire. When
the wedding procession has withdrawn to its halting place, the boy's sister takes him in
her arms and gets a rupee. The shawls of the pair are then unknotted, the boy salutes
bis father-in-law and gets a rupee, which is spent on liquor.



560
Kudhan-Kuka.
Like other aboriginal tribes, the Kuchbands extract curative oil from
sánda lizard and do blood-letting with leeches or by the cupping process.
The Kuchband in Hissár worship Rám Deo and Lalta Masáni. The
temple of the former is said to lie in the desert 20 miles west of
Bikaner. A fair takes place there twice a year in Bhádon and Magh,
and on these occasions the Kuchband visit the shrine and make an
offering of one rupee each. They have no respect for other places
of pilgrimage, such as Hardwár, Jawálájí, etc. They also worship
the cow. In the event of any one falling sick, it is customary to
invoke Rám, thus~ Rám, we will offer one seer of grain to your
mother cow. Should the patient recover, a cow is fed. If small-pox
breaks out the tribe visits the shrine of Lalta Masáni in Gurgaon. A
promise is then made to bring up two pirgios to her service, food is
given to two old and to two young women in her pame, and a cocoanut
pivotered on the lin Hoshiámpuries District, udh bás, and
Phere is also a The animals is then killed by
The Kuchband in Hoshiárpur say they are descended from Khizr
Pal of Allábbás in the Aligarb District of the United Provinces.
There is also a Maháráni's shrine at Alláhbás, and at her shrine a
pig is sacrificed. The animal's forehead is daubed with vermilion and
an earring put in its ear. It is then killed by sticking a large needle
into its ribs, the head used to make a palao, while the rest of the
flesh is cooked separately and thrown into the fire with five loaves and
some liquor as an offering to Maháráni.
Kuchbands bave a dialect or at least an argot of their own and
nicknames for many tribes. The Ját is called a Pant, the Mahajan or
money-lender a Kapnia, the Chamár a Namoa, the Gujar a Jhomar
and the Musalmán a Dela.
KUDHAN, a Muhammadan clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
KUHÁRA a small caste, nearly all Muhammadans, who work as water,
carriers and are probably Jhínwars. They are found chiefly in Sialkot
and Baháwalpur.
Kúk, a tribe (agricultural) grouped with the Mughals in Jhelum.
Kriv a muhin or sept of the Gil Ját. Found in strength in Hoshiarpur
where the sept have a báiya or group of originally 22 villages.
Kuka, a fanatical sect of the Sikhs. To the peaceful order of the
Údásís belonged one Bálak Singh, an Aroſa by caste, of Hazro in
Attock, who about 1846 inaugurated among the Sikhs a movement
which was directed against the participation of Brahmans in weddings,
and generally, against their influence over the community. He
formed adherents in the Sikh garrison of the fort, and they became
known as Sagrási or Habiás.* On Bálak Singh's death in 1863 his
nephew Kábn Singh succeeded him, retaining in the locality a certain
number of followers, whose doctrines are never divulged. Bálak
Singh's teaching was, however, taken up by Rám Singh, a carpenter
of Bhainí Alá in Ludhiána,t where he built an extensive dora apd
No explanation of these two terms appears to have been suggestod.
+ According to local legend Rám Singh was building a house at Hazro for a Sayyid
when he found he had cut a beam too short. The Sayyid's daughter bade him try it again.
He did so and found it had grown too long. From her he learnt the words of powor



Kúkára-Kuláchi.
561
maintained considerable state. He preached that he was himself an
incarnation of Gurú Govind Singh and prophesied the speedy over-
throw of the British power. In 1872 tbe Kúkas rose without any
concerted plan, and a band of about 150 invaded the Máler Kotla State
and attacked the capital, but were beaten off. At Rurr, a villaga
in Patiala, thuy surrendered and 49 of them were executed by the
Deputy Commissioner of Ludhiána. Rám Singh who had not
personally participated in the events was deported to Rangoon where
he died in 1888, but his followers believe he is still alive and will
re appear. His brother Budh Singh inherited the dera. Rám Singh
had divided the Punjab into districts, each under an agent, who bore
the Muhammadan title of súba* and was under his direct control. His
followers were called Kúkast or "shouters” because, unlike other
Sikhs, they fall into a state of frenzy (waid) I during their devotions
shaking their heads and shouting their prayers. The latter end with
à cry of Sat Sri Akál, "God is True." Like many other sects they
have been accused of holding orgiastic rites. Outwardly the Kúka is
often distinguished by the sidhi pag, a special way of tying the turban
straight, and by a knotted necklace of woollen cord the knots of which
are used like beads of a rosary. Of recent years the sect has adopted
the name Námdhária. The Kúkas are not an order, but at the
edifice erected at Durga (near Nawáshahr in Jullundur) in honour of
Guru Tegh Bahadur the ministrants are said to be Kúkas. The Kúkás
revere the Sau Sakhi, a book which professes to be a conversation
between Sahib Singh and Gurbaksh Singh on the sayings and doings
of Gobind Singh, the tenth Guru.S
Kúkára, the chief exorcists (dán denewálás) of the Sandal Bár. They
: bave a semi-sacred position.-See Nekokára.
KULÁCHI, one of the three branches of the Dodai Baloch and tribesmen of
the Fateh Khan who founded the Dera of that name. The Kuláchi once
held a broad tract, 20 kos wide by 12 lung, in Dera Ismail Khan and
gave their name to the town of Kuláchi, from which the tahsil of
Kuláchi takes its name. But at the close of the 18th century they
were described as once subjects of the Mirrani Baloch and then
tributary to Mirza Khán, the Qizzilbásh, to whom they paid Rs. 12,000
a year in revenue. They appear to have accompanied the Hot, who
found Dera Ismail Khán, in considerable numbers, but settled in that
tract as cultivating proprietors rather than as a military caste and
they have now sunk to the status of Játs, Kuláchi tahsil having been
overrun by the Gandapur Patháns who are still dominant in it,
which had enabled her to lengthen the beam. These were wáh gurú, or according to others.
“ Alláh.hu al-saniad," Rám Singh's ruin was attributed to his having revealed this watch:
word too freely to his followers.
· * These Muhammadan terms must not be taken to imply any loanings towards Islám on
the part of the Kúkás who in 1870 perpetrated the murder of a number of Muhammadan
butchers at Amritsar in revenge for their slaughter of kine.
† Fr. P. kúk, a shriek or cry.
† Arab. waji, ecstasy. The Kúkás also practise religious dances, in which the
approaching extirpation of the heathen is symbolised by drawing the hand across the
throat.-
Maclagan, § 107.
$ Santokh Singh, author of the Súraj Parkásh, does not however mention this work and
its authenticity is not established. Macauliffe's Sikh Religion, Vol. V, p. l.



umerous is the potter and is he is more ofte HUHÁR, KÚBHÁR OR
H
562
Kulai-Kumhár.
Kulaí, an agricultural clan found in Shahpar.
KÚLÁLE, potters in the valley below Chitral and in the Gilgit and Indus
valleys ; see Chitráli.
Kulár, a small Ját clan in Jínd which has a Sidh whose samadh is in Kulár
Khás. He was killed by a carpenter, so they never give or sell ghi
or beestings to a man of that caste.
KULIÁR, 8 Ját tribe found in the Lodhrán tahsil of Multán.
KOLYA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
KUMBÁR, GBOMÁR, GAUMÁR, KHÚBÁR, KOBHÁR, KHUHÁR, KÚBHÁR OR KUBár,
fem. -f. The Kumbár, or, as he is more often called in the Punjab,
Ghumiár, is the potter and brick-burner of the country. He is most
numerous in Hissár where he is often a husbandman, and in the sub-
montane and central districts. On the lower Indus he has returned
himself in some numbers as Ját. He is a true village menial, receiving
customary dues, in exchange for which he supplies all earthen vessels
needed for household use, and the earthenware pots used on the Persian-
wheel wherever that form of well gear is in vogue. He also, alone of
all Punjab castes, keeps donkeys; and it is his business to carry grain
within the village area, and to bring to the village grain bought else-
where by his clients for seed or food. But he will not carry grain out
of the village without payment. He is the petty carrier of the villages
and towns, in which latter he is employed to carry dust, manure,
fuel, bricks, and the like. His religion appears to follow that of the
neighbourhood in which he lives. His social standing is very low, far
below that of the Lohár and not very much above that of the Chamár ;
for his hereditary association with that impure beast the donkey, the
animal sacred to Sítala, the small-pos goddess, pollutes him; as also his
readiness tu carry manure and sweepings. He is also the brick-burner
of the Punjab, as be alone understands the working of kilns; and it is
in the burning of pots and bricks that he comes into contact with
manure, which constitutes his fuel. It would appear that he makes
bricks also when they are moulded; but the ordinary village brick of
sun-dried earth is generally made by the coolie or Chamár. The
Kumhár is called Pazáwagar or kilo-burner, and Kúzagar (vulg. Kuj-
gar) or potter, the latter term being generally 17sed for those only who
make the finer sorts of pottery. The Gilgar, Gilsáz and Gilkár should
probably be regarded as groups of the Ráj or Tarkhán, rather than
of the Kumhár. Grave.diggers, gorkun or gorkand, are said to be
generally Kumbárs. In Pesháwar and in Attock and Rawalpindi the
Kumhár is known as the Kulál or Kalál. Multáni in Gurgaon is said
to denote a Kumhár, potter's work being often done there by men from
Multán. Phusrai also appears to be a synonym. On the frontier the
potter appears to be known as Gilgo.
The Kumhárs are both Hindus or Sikhs and Muhammadads by re-
ligion.
The Hindu Kenhárs.
The Hindu Kumhár is sometimes termed, honorifically Parjápat or
Prajápatí, after the Vedic Prajápatís, who were lords and creators of
the universe, because they make things of earth. In Kapurthalá, how



: Kumhár origins.
563
ever, the title is said to be bestowed on the Kumhárs because they trade
in grain and transport it. In Nábha the Kuchár* claims descent from
Brahma as in the well-known lines :-
Rám ját ká Rángra, Kishn ját ká Ahir,
Brahmmá ját Kumhár hai, Sheo ki ját faqir.
“ Ráma was by caste a Rángar, Kishen an Ahír, Brahmma a Kumhár,
and Shiva a faqir."
Once, runs the legend, Brahma divided some sugarcane among his sons,
and each of them ate his piece, except the Kumbár who put his into a
pitcher full of earth and water in which it struck root. When the god
some days later asked his sons for the cane, they bad none to give him,
but the Kumhár offered his to the god and received from him the title
of Parjápat or Glory of the World'. But nine other sons of Brahma,
ancestors of the Brahmans, also received the title.
Tradition also points persistently to the bhagat or saint, Kubba, as
av ancestor of the Kumhárs. In Gurgaon he is said to have had two
wives, the first of whom ran away from her home and so her children
were called Gola. The second wife's offspring were called Mahr or
Mahár because she was the sister of the first. Another version is that
the first wife after forsaking her husband married his servant, gola.
In these legends the Mahrs claim superior status to the Golas, but the
latter tell quite another story. Thus in the Bawal nizámat of Nábha
the Golas say that Brahma had 60,000 sons whom he ordered to make
earthenware. To one of them he gave a gola (ball) for a pattern. He
made vessels like it, and a vessel larger than a pitcher and called gol
is still made in Báwal by the Kumhárs. Hence they are called Golas.
Brahma also gave him a wheel on which to make pcttery. For this
reason all Hindus at a wedding go to a Kumhár's house to reverence
the chak,t when Brahma is worshipped.
And yet again the Golas in Nábha claim Kúbá as one of themselves
and say that he it was who made 20 pitchors a day to give away as
alms, until one day 30 sáhds came to his house; nevertheless relying
on God's grace he bade his wife sit behind a curtain and hand each of
them a pitcher. Miraculously the 20 vessels became 30, as described
in the following version of the well-known lines :-
Kubi bhagat Kumháp thá,
Bhándă ghaſtá bís.
Har Govind kirpá kari,
Hue bis ke tis.
« Kúbá was a potter and made 20 pots a day; but the Almighty was
gracious and the 20 increased to 30."
To this incident is due the custom at Hindu weddings of curtaining
off a room in which sweets are placed, a Brahman, sitting behind the
curtain, being trusted to dispense unbounded hospitality. Moreover
Kumbárs still supply ascetics with earthenware gratis.
de 20 pitchers use; neverthhand each of
* Or Ghumbár, as he is termed, except in Bawal nizámat with a pun on his vocation,
which involves“ turning.'
† It symbolises the sudarshan bhakkur or discus of Sri Krishna,



564 .
The Hindu Kumhárs.
The Hindu Kumhárs of the south-east Punjab are divided into two
main groups Mahr and Gola, the latter being inferior. Mahr wives
wear no nose-ring.
The origins of the Mahrs and Golas are variously described. The
word Mahr has given rise to several folk-etymologies. One, which is
somewbat widespread in the south-east Punjab, avers that once during
a famine a Kumhár woman left her home and in her wanderings lost her
infant son, who grew up and, returning home, married his own mother
in ignorance of their relationship. But the truth came out, and so
their children were called man-bar, or mother-stealer. But Mahar
is also traced to mahr, 'venerable' or 'chief'; and, in Jínd, where the
Mahrs claim to be the pure descendants of Kúbá bhagat, to maur,
scrown.'
There are, however, several other groups in Gurgaon, viz., the Hanslia,
Tanur,* Mali and Ráj Kumbár. 'Of these the last named work as
masons and thus hold a superior position, the higher Hindu castes not
disdaining to drink water drawn by them. In the Nábha account are
noted a Baldia,t a Hatelia] and an Agaria group, each termed khánp.
In Sirmúr, Náhan tahsil, we find the Mahr sub-caste only, the Golas
not being found there, though they are found in Paonta.
The Hindu Mahr gots|| include one or two names of some interest.
For instance :-
According to a tradition current in Lahore the forebear of the Mahar
Kumhars had four sons; to the eldest of whom he assigned the task of
sifting the brick dust, whence he was called Sangroha (sifter'): to
the second son he entrusted the wheel with its tholepin (kila), whence
Kilia : the third slaped the wet earth and brought out the ends (nok),
whence Nokbal: and the fourth dried them, whence Sokhal, from sukh,
dry. These now form four gots. À Rájput of the Sarobi got brought
up a boy and married him to his daughter, but then discovering he
was a Kumhár disowned him and his wife. Sarohi is also said to mean
out-caste. So too among the Golas|| we find the Jalandhrá got which
is so called after Rúpá, a bhagat of Devi, who was born in the water
(ial). It is the chief got of the Gola group in Lahore.
In Kapurthala, Amritsar and, generally speaking, in the Punjab.
north of the Sutlej the Mahr-Gola classification is unknown. The
prir.cipal got in the central Punjab is the Dol, but there are many
other sections. T.
To the list of Rindu Kumbár gots may be added the Utrádhí, in
Multán, whose females used to wear the nath. They are shop-keepers
by trade and do not make pottery. They abstain from eating meat.
* The Tanur gots are Khangar, Khotia, Maháwália and Rai Badár.
+ The Baldia are so called because they live by carrying earth on balds (bullocks). They
do not act as servants, and are not found in the Nabha State.
The Hatelia are so called because, unlike the others, they do not make earthenware on
a wheel but by hand. They are not found in Nábha and do not act as servants.
$ The Mahr women in Sirmúr wear the nosering, which the Golas do not, but the
Thera sub-caste, which is the highest of the three, also wear it. This Thera group is not
mentioned elsewhere.
|| For a full list see Appendix.
Ő See Appendix,



Kumhár groups.
565
of Sirga hatti a ma ho use eter's ochte Bidaiwa really ste, as,
In Gurdaspur the Hindu Ghumárs are divided into two groups, ope
claiming descent from Rájá Sain Pál, a Rájput, who had seven cons:-
1. Ghuman.
1 6. Haljhal) Who became potters. Their
2. Ojha.
descondants avoid marriage
8. Tatla.
inter se, because they were
4. Machchána.
7. Tak ) true brothers.
5. Kahlon, who became a cultivator and
thus a Ját by caste,
The Territorial Groups.
The Kumhárs of Sirsa are divided into the Jodhpuria, from Jodhpur,
who use the furnace or bhatti and are generally mere potters, and the
Bíkáneri or Desi, from Bikáner who use kilns (pajâwas), but are chiefly
agricultural and look down upon the potter's occupation as degrading.
In Hissar there are four nondescript groups, the Bídáwati, Magrechi,
Nagori and Bhandia and others. All these appear to be really differ-
ent tribes and not separate clans of one and the same tribe or caste, as,
though all snioka and eat together, they will not intermarry. Of these
the first-named smoke with Játs, and take wives from the Rugrachi,
but will not give them brides in return. Other groups mentioned in
accounts from this District are the Gola, Maru and Mula, all three dis-
tinct and not intermarrying. But other accounts make the Gola the
same as the Marú and the Bídáwati identical with the Magrechi.
Several of the Kumhár tribes have abandoned pottery and taken to
agriculture as an occupation and have thus risen in the social scale.
Other territorial groups of the Hindu Kumhárs are :-
1. Bágrí or Márwáří,* q. v.
2. Bángar(ú) a sub-caste, found in Kapúrthala, originally immi.
grants from the Bángar.
3. Desi.*
Occupationally, the Bágri group is also sub-divided into Klapmárús
or agriculturists and Kbapbapdas or pottors, which form sub-castes,
as they do not intermarry, or eat or smoke together. They avoid four
gots in marriage, The Márwárís of the Bágar use camels at weddings;
as they keep camels instead of donkeys. Besides Guga, they also affect
Jín Deví, whose sbrine is on a hill near Jaipur. Fairs are held there
on the 8th and 9th sudi of Chait and Asauj.
The Márwárí-Desi groups appear to be found only in Jínd, and in
Sialkot.
The Kumhárs of Kángļa appear, however, to be also known as Desí,
and their women wear gold nose-rings. Their gots are Daniál, Gana
gotra and Sohal. In Máler Kotla the Pajáwagars are said to be Desí,
there being no Márwáſís in the State, and this Desí group is further
sub-divided into Mahrs and Golas. In Jínd these two sub-divisions of
the Desi group are also found, the Mahr being also called Maru.
The Occupational Groups.
The Kumhárs are also divided into several occupational groups,
viz. :
(i) The Agaria or Aggaria (a synonym for Kúzgar, y. v.) who are
found in Nábha, where they form a bans without gots, and
* For a full list see Appendix.
hey do not istand Klapbandup is also sub-



566
Kumhár occupations.
avoid near kin in marriage. Claiming to be of higher rank
than the other Rumhárs, they wear the janeo and cook
their food in a chauk.
(ii) The Kundgar, or makers of kunds (tronghs or tubs), in Má.
lerkotla, when they are all of one got, the Aggarwal, and
say they came from Agra. They claim Rájput extraction
and are often called Panjpire as they worship five pirs
Pirán Pír, Gugá, Khwájájí, Devi and Nigáhá.
(iii) The Kúzgar, found in Jínd, Nábha (where they are also
called Ăgaria), Kángra, Sirmúr, Multán, and Máler Kotla
(where they are all Sálváhan by got). They make kúzas or
small vessels and claim Chhatri origin. (See Agaria (i)
supra].
(iv) The Núngars or salt-workers are found in Jind; and in Multán
where they are known as Nunáris and used formerly to
make salt, but they now deal in charcoal.
(v) The Pajáwagar or kiln-burners, found in Máler Kotla where
they make bricks and have two groups-Márwárí and
Desí.
(vi) The Shoragar, found in Jínd, and in Sháhpar, are makers of
saltpetre, bat hardly form a distinct group.
The cults of the Kumhár's offer many points of interest. Thus in
Delhi the Kuihárs worship all the deities, and all, Hindus tod appa-
rently, especially affect Tabar Pír, as well as the Khwaja of Ajmer;
and in the amáwas of Asauj they visit the shrine of Shams Khán at
Nangal-dewat in Delhi. The goddess is also worshipped, her devotees
giving chárún, etc., to the poor in her name. In Maler Kotla the Hindu
Kúzegars invoke Pír Dastgír,* the Pirán Pir, before beginning work,
making a diva or earthen lamp in his name, to ensure the safety of the
things made. In Nábha the Kúzegars again invoke Ghulam Qadir
Muhí-ud-Din Jiláni and other Muhammadau saints, though they are
Hindus. At weddings too they make offerings to pirs, etc., and dis-
tribute rice cooked with sugar among Muhammadan beggars, the
brotherhood, and people of their own quarter.
In Dera Gházi Khán the Kumbárs, who are all Muhammadans, affect
the Taunsa Pír.
In Lahore the Kumhárs celebrate the Holi with more enthusiasm
than any other caste. Their principal shrines are those of Rám Sabai,
pír of Ronecha in (?) Lahore, and of the pir of Naşar, a village in
the district of Rincha Cháranan in the Khetri fief of Jaipur State...
The Nararwálá pír also has a shrine in Hateli, a village in (?) Nábha,
whence the Kumhárs migrated into the Amloh nizámat of Nábha.
When a child is 14 months old they carry it to his shrine, where they
offer 11 sers of malidá and this is also distributed among the brother-
hood. The mother is then taken to a well to draw water, carrying
with her some bakli (boiled grain) for distribạtion among children.
.
* Dastgir is also the pir of the Kashmiri (Muhammadan) Kumbárs in Gürdáspur,



The Muhammadan Kumhárs.
567
When the child is 6 months old they offer sweets to the goddess at
Kangſa. They also worship the chak at the Holi and Diwali festivals.
The Bumbárs in Nábha, both Golas and Mahrs, affect Bhairon and
Guga especially. And in the Bawal nizámat they play the tabla or
drum, an instrument invented by them and used by Rupisar Kumhár,
an attendant of Devi, with whom he used to play chess. In an
assemblage of Kumhárs one of the caste assumes female attire, and dances
and sings while the others perform music. Kumhárs sometimes act
as bards, and as such associate with Bahrupias, though they consider it a
disgrace to play the drum for prostitutes. The Kumhárs express joy
by a curious dance, in Lahore.
The Kumhárs, both Gola and Mahr, of Báwal worship Satí once a
year, and also at weddings, by putting rice cooked in milk on a piece of
plastered ground, where the women bow their heads in reverence. A
bride is bound to ride on an ass at her wedding under penalty of ex-
communication. In Amloh the Gola Kumhárs do not wear red clothing
at weddings. Those of other nizamats bring the bride in a cart.
• The Kumhárs of Bawal perform a child's first tonsure at Bhairon's
shrine at Bas in Gurgaon, and to this shrine a bride and bridegroom
are also taken with their garments tied together, to offer sweets and
cash in lieu of a he-goat.
In Kángra the Kumhárs have no saints of their own, except the
potter's wheel, chak, which originated in Gorakh Náth's gift to them of
his mundar or earring for a wheel. Ever since it has been worshipped
at the Diwálí, and on that day Kumhárs cease from work, make offer-
ing to the chak in fulfilment of vows, and, if a goat is slaughtered
sprinkle its blood on the wheel. When a chak is revolved for the first
time some sweet porridge (karah! is offered to it. If a man has no
children or if they die young he vows his next child to the chak, to
which solemn offerings are made if his prayer be heard. The chak is
also worshipped by Rajputs of the higher groups.
Fen Kumhárs are true Sikhs, but some are followers of Nának or his
disciples. Thus in Amritsar the Sukhal Kumhárs acknowledge the
authority of the mahants of Tejiwálá and Rám Dás, who are disciples
of Bábá Budhá, Nának's disciple, and these mahants come to con-
gratulate them on the birth of a son, receiving presents in return.
The Muhammadan Kumhárs.
The Muhammadan Kumhárs also have two territorial groups Desi
and Multání in Máler Kotla, Jind and Nábha. The Desi women
wear & gown (pahan) over the trousers, which hangs from the neck,
while the Multání women wear a petticoat. Desi women believe in
Sítla, but not so the Multánis.
In Gurdaspur the division is into Panjabi and Kashmírí : in Sialkot
and Gujrát into Kashmírí and Desí.
The Muhammadan Kashmirí sections in Gurdaspur and Sialkot
are :-
Chang, in Gurdaspur ; Parar, in Sialkot ; Sadji, in Gurdaspur ; Shaikh
in Gurdaspur aod in Gujrat, in which latter district all Kashmírí



568
Kumhár guilds.
Kamhárs claim to be Shaikhs and have no other sections. As these
Shaikhs do not dance or sing they have to employ Desi Kumhárs for
the purpose.
The Muhammadan Kumhárs have no occupational groups of import-
ance, the only one of interest being the Kuláls,* in Gujrát, who are
professional singers and dancers by trade, giving performances at
Kumhár weddings. Tbough looked down upon by the other Kumhárs
they obtain brides from them.
In Mianwali, Leiah tahsil, certain groups are alluded to but not
defined. These are :-
1. Aogam or ? Bangam
2. Baryar
which intermarry.
Hangam or ?' Angam )
In Mianwali the Kumhárs are cultivators as well as potters, and a
few are bards or musicians to the land-holding tribes. The latter are,
however, looked down upon. In Leiah the Kumbárs claim descent from
Jalál Bakrí,t the saint, whom they invoke in beginniog work in the
prayer :-
Dádá Jalál Baqri, Hájí Gilgú,
Allâh kare, 80 ho. I
But in Bhakkar they affect Shah Husain Bakhsh of Peshawar.
In Amritsar Luqmán is said to be the ancestor of all the Kumhárs,
and on beginning work he is invoked by saying :-
Bismillah-ul-Rahmán-ul-Rahim hu ustád Luqman Hakim Hájí
Gilgú.
Jaisi Alláh kare so ho; dhar thoba, yání chalá chak ko.
Galgu is the pir of the Punjabi (Muhammadan) Kumbárs in Gardás-
par and of the caste in Shahpur. In Multán Hájí Gulgu is the priest'
of the Kumhárs, and at weddings they offer Re. 1 and 6 yards of red
cloth to the jhandír: (standard-bearers8) appointed for the purpose, in
his name.
In Gujranwala the Muhammadan Kumhárs are said to believe in the
Prophet Daniel and to begin work by pronouncing his name.
The Muhammadan Multánís affect a saint at Sámána in Patiala,
while the Desís visit the well-known shrine of Sádhaura in Ambála.
Caste Administration.
The Kumbárs have a somewhat elaborate system of caste govern-
ment. Thus in the south eastern districts, the Kumhárs have chaun-
tras at each large town or city, e. g., at Delhi,ll and to this place all
* Kolál (?) is said to be a contemptuous term for a Kumbár in Lahore. The Kolál is a
got of the Mirásís and its members are mirásis to the Kumhárs, though they sometimes
work as Kumhárs also.
t In Dera Ismail Khán, however, they claim descent from Mír Katal.
Hájí Gilgú is here explained to be the perfect saint who could fulfil all desires.
§ They say the jharders are the khalifas of their priests.
il The Delhi chaurhri used to attend all important meetings in Gurgaon, but he is now
said to have appointed (subordinate ?) chaudhris in towns and villages.
There is also said to be a chaudhri for each group of villages.



Kumhár guilds.
569
disputes, unless tried on the spot, are brought for trial before a
panchayat. Each chauntra has its chaudhri, whose office is not usual.
ly hereditary, and he presides over the pancháyat.
The chaudhrá visits any village in his chauntra at weddings, funerals
or other gatherings. At a wedding he receives a rupee, some ghi
and a little fruit. If the chaudhri of any other chauntra attends he
receives sweets and ghi. If not present in person the chaudhri gets
only Re. 1 in cash. This money is earmarked for the expenses of the
whole community or its pancháyat. A chaudhrí can impose a fine of
Rs. 100 or even excommunicate an offender. Among Bindu Kumhár's
the chaudhri gets a turban or 4 copper coins at a wedding or s káj.
In Gurgaon he receives Re. 1 and a turban at a wedding or káj ; and
decides disputes relating to contracts of betrothal or marriage, innova-
tions in custom, and judges co-habitation with a woman of another
caste. As a punishment he can fine the offender or compel him to
entertain the brotherhood.
In Kángļa the Kumhárs had their gaddi or head-quarters at some
place in the south, long since forgotten. Under native rule they also
had a book, called fanchnatú, which prescribed the wedding rites and
in which the names of the married pair were registered, the elder
(chaudhrí) receiving annas 8 as his fee, but the practice has fallen into
disuse. The chaudhri is elected and his powers are limited. He is
first consulted in regard to questions of betrothal, etc., and if necessary
he apparently adjudicates upon them.
In Jind and Nábha the office of chaudhri is either hereditary or elec-
tive, but in the latter State the Kumhárs have chaudhrís of their own,
indəpendent of Hissár. In Sirmúr, the Mahr Kumhárs of Náhan
have panchayats, and a chaudhri at Ambála, but the Mabrs and Golas
of Paonta have a chaudhrí or chauntra at Buria, in Am bála District,
and he is subordinate to the chaudhri at Kalait. At a funeral he re-
ceives a rupee and a pagri, but at a wedding only the bhají (sweet-
meats, etc.), is divided by (? shared with) the chaudhrí nothing else
being puid him. Offences against the brotherhood are punished by
fine, the offender being summoned by the chaudhri before a panchayat.
The chaudhri has a wazir, nominated by himself, who addresses the
panchayat on the chaudhri's behalf. The panchayat's finding is re-
porled by the wazir tə ühe chaudhri and if he concurs the matter is
settled. If not, it is again debated by the panchayat. The chaudhri's
office is usually hereditary, and cannot be given to another family with.
out consulting the chaudhri and the pancháyat.
The Multání Kumhárs of Máler Kotla have only a loose system of re.
ferring disputes, especially those relating to marriages, to arbitration
by the elders of the sub-caste. But the Desí sub-caste in this State has
an ancient system of administration. The chaudhri, who lives at Basí in
Patiala, holds a sanad bestowed on him by some ruler, which confers on
him authority to decide disputes within the caste. This sanad descends
from father to son. At weddings the chaudhri gets Re. 1 and a pagri,
which is presented to him persoually or sent to him through a mirási.
The pancháyat system is found, more or less developed in Lahore,
Amritsar, Gurdáspur, and Gujránwálą.



570
The Kúndah-panthis.
In the south-west of the Punjab the chaudhri is called mehtar, and
is elected from the family in which the office is hereditary. He
settles petty dispntes in the caste and attends weddings and funerals,
roceiving a double share of the bháji. His son as successor is installed
by the community by tying à turban on his head. In Mianwali,
however, the system seems to be in complete abeyance.
West of the Indus we find the mehtar exercising a large authority
in Isá KhelIn Pesháwar he is termed kalantar, and he decides
disputes, but his chief duty is or was to assign the tasks required of
the Kumhárs under the Sikh system of forced labour.
Kumhár dress.
In Kángra the Hindu Desí Kumhár women wear a nose-ring of
gold.
In Máler Kotla the Mahammadan Maltání Kumhár women wear
A ghagrú (petticoat) and the náth, but these are not worn by the
Desí women, who wear instead an angiá or bodice. In Nábha the
Desí women wear over their trousers a pahan, which hangs from the
neck, the upper part forming a bodice. The Multánís wear a gown.
In Máler Kotla* the Mahr wives wear the náth, whereas those of
the Gola sub-caste do not, and in Nábha they do not bore the nose.
The Mahr women in the latter State also wear loose trousers below the
gown.
In Mulbán the Hindu Utrádbí females used to wear a gold náth.
The Muhammadan (Multánís mostly) Kumhár females wear the
pairáhan or chola through life, as a role, but some of them, chiefly
the Kalai or Kailai, who are found in Baháwalpur, replace the cholá by
the choli after marriage.
In Míánwali ta hsíl girls assume the chola after marriage. In Lejah
Kumbár women wear ang ornament save the nose-ring and those
worn on the feet.
The Kumhárs give their name to Kumhársain, one of the smaller
Simla Hill States. The State was founded by Pahár Singh, one of
foar Brahman brothers from Gaya, who had a pet cat which was
killed by a mouse that sprang upon ther from beneath one of the
18 potters' wheels then at work at Kumhársain. He complained to
Koteshart Mahadeo, who is said to be the owner of the chiefship
(gaddi), and the god promised him redress. So all the Kumhárs were
killed, except a pregnant woman and her descendants still live in the
State.
KÚNDAH-PANTHí. A sect, founded some 40 sears ago by Hakim Singh
of Rámpur, in Pațiála. Hákim Singh was described as an insignificant
looking man, living in filth, and possessing a few tracts and a New
Testament in Panjábi. (which he had obtained from American Mis.
* And also in Jind, where the náth is said to be of gold or silver. In this State it is also
added that the Mahrs use waggons at weddings, whereas the Golas, both men and women,
must ride asses on such occasions. Golas themselves beat drums, which Mahrs will
not condescend to do, at a wedding.
t Koteshar or Koti deota is still the god of the State and has a temple at Madholi, a
village in Kumhirsain.



sectect lot of truth Africa and theme Thar comel Topo dowo, led mee being. He
Rundi–Kúnjrá.
571
sionaries at Ludhiana), from which he used to read to his few followers;
but they soon numbered about 3,000 souls, and included several well-
to do inhabitants of Rámpur. His preaching too underwent change,
and he taught that the British Government would shortly be replaced
by his own. Giving himself up to religious meditation as a lad,
Hakim Singh who was a Ját, wandered about for several years as a
fagir visiting shrines in different parts of the country, in the belief
that, by so doing, he would atone for his past sins and obtain merit
in the eyes of God. Then he settled down at his native village and
began to preach the worship of the Neh Kalank Avatár* or spotless
incarnation of the Deity. He obtained some Christian books from
the missionaries at Ludhiana and declared that Christ was the Neh
Kalank, and that he was himself an incarnation of Christ; the Imám
Mahdí expected by Muhammadans, and also the Raghnáth believed
in by Hindús. He taught his disciples to eat together and called his
sect Kúndah Panthí, kúndáh meaning an earthen vessel, and panth,
a sect). He enjoined strict morality, and declared that the Satyug,
or era of truth, was about to commence. While acknowledging
Christ was the true Garú, he maintained that he himself was an
incarnation of Christ, and that it was for him to baptize.
Originally a disciple of one Thartpurí, a sádh of his own village,
for 20 years Hakim Singh did not come out of his house. He had
his head shaved and also those of several women. To avoid obeying
the calls of nature, he used to put a stick down his throat after
eating and so cause himself to vomit. This was called nouli karam.
He was believed to possess the power (called joga bhiás) of being able
to hold his breath for a long time without showing any sign of life. He
was a great-opium eater and when visitors called on him the first thing
he offered them was opium.
RUNDI.-(1) A Pațbán tribe of the same descent as the Niázi. The
original Kundi country consists of a tract lying along the Sohali
stream below the Bhittani range in the Tánk tahsil of Dera Ismail
Khán. The tribe is loathe to emigrate and herds together in its old
villages, and all their eastern villages have been occupied by immi.
grants from Marwat. The Kundis are a Pawinda tribe, but settled in the
district about the same time as the Daulat Khel Loháni. The Kundi
are or were a lawless tribe and great robbers, and the proverb ran :
“Better a dead Kundi than a live one." (2) See also under Isperka.
Kundo, a tribe of Játs descended from Kundu, a Rájput, who married a
Ját widow by karewa and so lost status. It is found in Jind tahsil.
(See under Phogát.)
KONJIÁNWÁLÁ, a sect of fagirs, said to practise divination by means of keys.
They appear to come from Sialkot and are found in Jhelum. They
are probably Ráwals.
KÚNJŘÁ, KONJşÁ, KARÚNJşá, & hawker of vegetables, kúpjrá is &
purely occupational term nothing more or less than the Hindustani,
are prappear to cof faqirs.
* There is a prophecy in the Hindu Shástars to the effect that “ Noh Balank Avatar"
will be bora in the house of a Khatri in village Sambhal in the Mor ádábád district in
Sambat 1840 A.D. 1883-84.
† So callud because they all eat in common.



572
Kupcháni-Kusan.
as sabzi-farosh is the Persian, for green-grocer. The big men generally
use the latter term, the small costermongers the former. But in no
case is it a caste. The Kúņjrá belongs as a rule to one of the castes
of market gardeners which have been described under minor agri.
cultural tribes. I do not know why Kúnjſá should have been returned
under that name only in the east. It may be that in other parts of
the Province it is more usual to call the saller of vegetables an Arbin
or Bághbán, as the case may be, and that the word Kúnirá is little
used. This probably is the true explanation, as the figures for Native
States show the same peculiarity.
KUPCHÁNI, & Baloch sept, now represented by only a few families in
Bhakkar tahsil.
Their tradition is that they fled from Persia into Balochistán,
whence they were expelled by the Marri, Bugti and Káhiri Baloch.
But they also say that they are an offshoot of the Qaisaráni tribe
of Sanghar tahsíl in Dera Ghazi Khán whose chief is stated to keep
their genealogical tree. In the east Kachhi of Balochistán the
Marris, Bugtis and Káhiris all say that prior to their advent into
that tract it was held by a people called Kupcháni of Ját origin
or status. This tradition lends support to the theory that Balochistán
was once occupied by Játs, who were driven out by the Pathán, Brahui
and Baloch.
Kúkál, see Boraí. Kúrai is also a Teli got.
KURÁN, KORAM, a group of KANETS found in the Simla Hill States of
Bashahr, Jubbal, Balsan, etc., and comprising numerous septs. Kuráns
give daughters in marriage to the Khash Kanets. In Basbahr the
Kurán is also called Rahú, q. v.
KUBAR, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
KURESHí, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur, see QURAISH.
Kormí, Kumbaí (KANBÍ, Kími).- A great caste of cultivators very widely
spread over the eastern parts of Hindustan and the Deccan. Of
good caste is the Kunbin, with hoe in hand she weeds the fields
together with her husband. But in the cantonments of the Punjab
the Kurmis are generally occupied, like other Púrbias, in cutting
grass, weaving and serving as grooms; and they are even said to
keep pigs. They are, of course, a very low caste; lower far in social
standing tban the indigenous agricultural castes of the Punjab.
KORPALKA, an agricultural clan fonnd in Shabpur.
KURTÁNÁ, see Kutáná.
KUBTANA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
KÚRETÁNAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
KUBUNJRA, see under Kúņira. A green-grocer.
KOSAN (? Kasán!, those, generally, who derive their livelihood directly
from the soil,' as opposed to ZANINDÁR : H. Davidson : L'idhiana
Settlement Report, 1859, p. 29,



Kút-Kuthrálo.
573
KÚT, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
KUTĀNA, for Kurtána or Kurutána.-The term for a Muhammadan Chúhra
in the south-west Punjab and equivalent to Musalli in the north-west.
The Kurtána are a class of sweepers, converted to Islám, who are
settled on the bank of the lower Indus and have given up scavenging
and eating carrion and taken to making ropes and working in
grass and reeds. The word is sometimes applied to any Muhammadan
sweeper, but, strictly speaking, only a convert who has become a
halál-khor or eater of things permitted by the Muhammadan law, is
a Kurtána. Some Kurtánas even cultivate land on their own account ;
and, so long as they do no scavengering, the Kurtágas are admitted
to religious equality by other Musalmáns. Possibly the Kurtánas of
the Indus banks are a distinct caste or people from the Cbúbras, but
they return no large tribes and appear to be a caste formed from the
debris of numerous tribes degraded by function. In the south-west
the term Khoja is also applied to a converted sweeper and is tbas
synonymous with Kurtánas, which literally means 'flogger' or exe-
cutioner : see foot-note to p. 183, supra.
KUTÆRÁLO, a sept of the Bhattis, descended from Kathral, son of Bhoni,
and found in Sialkot.
END OF VOLUME II.
