༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
ImageGroup:
W2DB25450
||70925972
11 PD36344
n/a
D29244
LCCN:
ISBN:
Title:
a glossary of the tribes and castes of the punjab and north-west frontier
province
Author:
དེནཟིལ་ཨིབབཙོན་
denzil ibbetson
n/a
Descriptor:
Original Publication:
n/a;n/a
Place:
delhi
Publisher:
languages department punjab
1970
Date:
Volume:
Total Volumes:
TBRC Pages:
Introductory Pages:
Text Pages:
Scanning Information:
In/a
n/a
Scanned at M/S Satluj Infotech Images, E-45, Sector 27 Noida, District Gautam Buddha
Nagar, U.P. 201301 via New Delhi, IN for the Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, 150 17th
st., New York, NY 10011, U.S.A 2006. Comments: 2008



A GLOSSARY
OF THE
TRIBES AND CASTES
OF THE
Punjab and North-West Frontier Province.
Based on the Census Report for the Punjab, 1883,
by the late Sir DENZIL IBBETSON, K.C.SI.,
and the Census Report for the Punjab, 1892, by
the Hon. Sir E. D. MACLAGAN, K.CIE., C.S.I.,
and compiled by H. A. ROSE.
VOL. III.
L.-Z.
WITH
Appendices A.-L
LANGUAGES DEPARTMENT PUNJAB
1970



GLOSSARY OF THE TRIBES AND
CASTES OF THE PUNJAB AND
N.-W. F. PROVINCE.



Reproduced By
Director, Languages Department, Punjab,
Through
Controller, Printing & Stationery Department,
Punjab.
First Published
1883
Reprinted
1970
Printed at
Punjab National Press, Delhi.
Price Rs. 10.25 P.



Publisher's Note
It may look unprogressive to bring out another reprint
of a book wbich was first published as far back as the later years
of the nineteenth century. It is possible that lot of further
research might have taken place in this subject during the
succeeding years, yet these works maintain their own reference
value. The idea behind the present venture is to make available
these rare works to most libraries and readers.
The British and other Western scholars rendered great
service to this land and their works still have great bearing on the
Language, Culture and History of the Punjab. The Languages
Department has planned to bring out reprints of the most valuable
works, including the present one, for the benefit of most readers,
scholars and research workers.
LAL SINGH
Patiala
January, 1970
Director
Languages Department
Punjab.



GLOSSARY
OF
PUNJAB TRIBES AND CASTES.
LABÁNA.-- Although generally associated with the Mahtams, the Labánas are
totally distinct from that caste. They are almost wholly confined to the
sub-imontane districts and Kangſa, but are numerous in Lahore and
also found in Gujranwála and Ferozepur, Muzaffargarh and Baháwal-
pur also contain Labána colonies. They are the carriers and hawkers
of the hills, and are merely the Panjábi representatives of that class of
Banjáras who inhabit thy sub-montane tracts east of the Ganges. The
Labảnas of Gujrát were thus described-by Captain Mackenize :-
• The Labánas are also a peculiar people. Their status amongst Sikhs is much the
same as that of the Mahtams. They correspond to the Banjáras of Hindustán, carrying on
an extensive trade by means of large herds of laden bullocks. Latterly they have taken
to agricultare, but as an additional means of livelihood, not as a substitute for trado. As
a section of the community they deserve, every consideration and encouragement. They
are generally fine substantially built people. They also possess much spirit. In anarchical
times when the freaks or feuds of petty governors would drive the Játs or Gujars to seek a
temporary abiding place away from their ancestral village, the Labánas would stand their
ground, and perhaps improve the opportunity by extending their grasp over the best
lands in the village, in which their shorter-sighted and less provident lords of the Manor
had, in some former period, permitted them to take up their abode for purposes of com.
inerce. Several cases of this nature came to light during settlement, and in most of them
the strength and spirit of progress were as apparent in the Labánas as were the opçosite
qualities conspicuous in their Gujar opponents. Their principal village is Tanda (which
means a large caravan of laden bullocks) and is an instance of what I have above alluded
to. Allowed to reside by the Gujar proprietors of Mota, they got possession of the soil,
built a kasba, and in every point of importance swamped the original proprietors. They
nave been recognized as proprietors, but feudatory to their former landlords, the Gujars of
Mota; paying to them annually in recognition thereof a sum equal to one-tenth of the
Government demand.
There is a curious colony of Labánas on the lower Indus who were
settled there under Sikh rule by Díwán Sáwan Mal, and who are almost
all Munna Sikhs or followers of Bába Nának, though many of thoin
are Hindus in Bahawalpur. These men have almost entirely given up
traffic and trade, and settled on the banks of the river where they lead
a sort of semi-savage life, hunting and making ropes and grass mats
for sale. They bardly cultivate at all, and Hindus do not associate with
them from fear of the Muhammadans who object to their eating wild
pig: The La bánas of Jhang are said to have come from Jaipur and
Jodhpur and to be the same as the Mahtams of Montgomery. On the
whole the Labánas appear to be by origin closely allied with, if not
actually belonging to, the vag'antand possibly aboriginal tribes which
will be discussed in the Introduction (Vol. I); and it may be that at
least some sections of the Labánas are of the same stock as they. (See



Labána origins.
further under Mahtam). About 30 per cent. of the Labánas are ne-
turned as Sikhs and alinost all the rest as Hindus, there being only
some 1,500 Musalmáus among them.
The term Labána appears to be derived from lún (salt) and bána
(trade), and the Lúbána, Lobána, Labána or Libána was doubtless the
great salt-carrying and salt-trading caste, as the Banjára was the
general carrier, in former times. Indeed the Labána is occasionally
called a Banjára. In Ambála he is also said to be called Bahrúpia,* on
account of his versatility in adoptiog different avocations. Headmen
among the Labanas are called Naik, and under them work is carried
on. A Náik gets a rupee at a betrothal and at a wedding a similar fee,
plus a leg of ho-goat.
Wherever a Labána settlement exists, a village named Tánda is almost
certain to be found. In Kángra the Labánas hold four hamlets, each
called Tánda. Tánd ir Labánki is said to mean a travelling body or
gang.
The origins claimed by the Labánas vary. In Ludhiana they claim
descent from Chaubán Rájputs of Jaipur and Jodhpur. In Gujrát they
say they are Raghubansi Rájputs and of the Sándlas gotra.
But in Kapúrthala they say they are really Gaur Brahmans of Pili.
bbít in the United Provinces and tell how a Rájá, being afflicted with a
mortal disease, was advised by Náru, a Brabman, to invite ten Brah-
maus to a feast of flesh and wine and give them a gift (dachchhna) of
a gold mohar each. The ten Brahmans bidden refused to take part in
such a feast and so Náru inveigled eleven Brabman boys to it and gave
them cach a mohar. Their parents learut of their degradation and
drove them forth, but the Rájá took them in. From them are de-
scended the Labánas. Later on, adds the Hoshiarpur account, the
sage Nárada got the boys married to the daughters of rákshasas,
demons who live on flesh and spirits, and himself became their priest.
But a variant from Kángra says that the Brahmans successfully re-
sisted the efforts of the Rájá to induce them to accept his offerings.
He was, it is related, a Pilia Rájput and, being afflicted with leprosy
and the loss of many of his kinswon, he was advised by the jotshis or
astrologers to feast Brahmans as described above. In vain he sent
for them and their girls and boys. Tho Brahmans holdiog it degra-
dation to accept gifts from a leper, placed all their goods on pack ani.
mals and took to the carrying trade. Many settled on the banks of
the Ganges and were called Pandit-Jotshis. The others who took to
marrsing were called Labanas from ládá, loading. With them some
Rájputs of the Pilia family, who were free of all taint of leprosy, were
also exiled and the Pilia Labánus claim descent from them and say
they are of the Káshab gotra.
* But in other accounts it is implied that the Bahrúpia is a sub-division of the Labánas,
und the only one in the caste wbich does not wear the janeo. Waterfield, however,
distinguished the Labála from the Bahrúpia. The former he described as a large,
well built, sbrewd, though rather heavy-looking man, while the Bahrúpia is generally spare,
lively auŭ good-tempered. Both however are of similar status.-Gujrat Settlement Report,
1861, p. 38.



Labána groups.
In Siálkoț, however, the gotra of the Pilia Labánas is said to be
Puslat. And that of the Dátla is said to be Kundlas, while the Ajráwat
is Saundlas. Ajráwat is said to be descended from Aj, father of
Jasrat and grandson of Rainchandra, through the latter's son Lau. In
Kapúrthala the following curious pedigree is given :-
Bohra.
Baba Hasna.
Nanda.
Khart.
The Muslim, rear to be homogonat in different ma
Salím Shah. Mihr Shah. Amin Shah.
One Khart Mánik appears in the Gujrat tradition which makes the
Labánas immigrants from Rai Bareilly.
The status of the Labánas varies somewhat in different parts of the
Punjab and it does not appear to be homogeneous. Three groups must
be distinguished :-
i The Musla Labánas.
ii. The Labánas of Ludhiana.
iii. The Labánas of Babáwalpur,
i. The Musla Labánas are so-called by group ii. Most accounts
represent these Labánas as having 11 sections or gots but the names of
these are variously stated.* In Gujrát the got names specified are as
follows:
i. Ajráwat (called Ghotra in Kángra). I v. Khásarya.
ii. Dátla (? laugher), also called vi. Gojalia,
Makhan.Sháhi.
vii. Gújar.
iii. Pília (painted with saffron).
| viii. Tatra or Tádra.
iv. Parwal, Padwál, Badwália. Porwal | ix. Wamiál or Mathaun (not Mahtam).
(said to be so called from padwá. x. Wámowál.
the janeo ceremony).
Txi. Nárowál,
The first five of these sections appear in nearly every account of the
caste. The remaining six are probably als or sub-septs, locally exogam-
ogs, resembling those found in Central India, or possibly they are
merely family or picknames. Of the eleven sections specified the first
six are also found in Ceutral India, apparently as endogamous groups
split up into numerous exogamous divisions. So far no traces of this
system have been found in the Punjab.
In the sub-montane tracts of Sialkot and Gujrát the Ajráwat look
down upon the Khásaryas, and the story goes that once thelatter
said that even the bullocks of the Ajráwat would get married, they had
so many daughters. The Ajráwat also look on the Gújar section as
inferior.
ü. The second group is confined to the Bet tract of Ludhiana,
where it holds seven small villages, and shares ir. three others. It dis-
The Tholing thickna meral in
ENE
* Sections in Kangļa :-i, iii and vii as above, and Daina, Kalwána. Gháfa, Dholthal,
Dahgra, Belia, Kheſa, Mochia, Blonia, Pudorgaya.
Sections in Hoshiarpur :--i, ii, iii, iv, v and vii as above, and Kakanya, Lulia, Ghara,
Kaluwana, Bbagtaun.
Sections in Lădhiána :-Pilia, Garha, Laldia, Jatre or Khanna-Kupța, Garha, Dalia or
Gajre, Parwal and Nagri. Of these the Garbas rank highest.



Udianama..
Bayrawat.
State the Labánaa hang together in recourse to the coleast
d and and rarely spent on to their origin
Labána customs.
avows all connection with the Musla Labánas and has the following
gots :-
Dagnáwat.
Majráwat.
Udiána.
Bartia.
Sakiána.
Balthia.
Barnáwat.
This group is distinguished by having a fixed bride-price, Rs. 120
being paid if the bridegroom is a child, Rs. 140 it he is an adult, to the
girl's father. They practise karewa. A curious custom on the Holi
is accounted for in a variant of the Prahlad legend. All are Sikhs.
iii. In Baháwalpur the caste is thus grouped :-
fi. Ramána.
Hypergamous group ii. Udána
{ do not intermarry,
üi. Gharnáwat or Gharnot } intermarty.
iv. Chihot ..Jintermarry.
In this State the Labánas claim to be Rathor. The Ramána and-
Udána are closely allied and hang together in all matters. They have
a strong panchayat system and rarely have recourse to the courts.
Guilty persons are fined and the penalty (dand) spent on & ritual feast
(karáh parshád) to the brotherhood. The legend about their origin
is that a Rathor had a son born with long moustaches and so he was
called labána or “cricket."
In Sialkot and Gujrát the tribe stands much higher, and appears to
be intermarrying with other agricultural tribes. This however does
not necessarily imply a great rise in the social scale, for in Ferozepur
the Baurias are intermarrying with Játs. Widow remarriage is tolerat.
ed, but, in Gujrát, the children of such marriages have a lower status.
They are all Sikhs, claiming to have been converted by Guru Govind,
and abstain from the flesh of animals slaughtered in the Muhammadan
manner as they consider it haram, and at the mere mention of haláld
meat exclaim wah gurú, wáh gurú, deprecating ang allusion to such a
subject.*
The social ceremonies of the Labánas vary greatly, not only from
district to district but within each district. These divergencies in
custoin are ascribed, by the Labánar themselves, to the composite
origins of the caste..
Birth observances.
In Sialkot the three ceremonies observed on the birth of a child
are :
1. The oldest woman of the family does not eat or even touch
anything with her mouth at the time of a birth in the house, she makes
-
* But in Kangſa both jhatka and haláld flesh may be lawfnlly eaten, it is said, though
it is also added that Labánas who are sewaks of Lakhdátá cover eat jhatka. Offerings
are made to that Pír for the safety of cattle at the spring and autumn harvests. His
priest is the Bharai but he gets no chúrma until he has prayed to the Pír to protect his
sewak, and it is also his daty to sacrifice animals in the halál form.
The labána is said to be an earth cricket with formidable jaws that bites severely.
Panjabi Dicty., p. 645,



Labána customs.
the mother wash her hands and face, and then, mixing sugar and flour
in equal quantities, makes small circular-shaped loaves called paparis
which are distributed to those present and to members of the caste.
In Gujrát no peculiar ceremony is observed on the birth of a child.
The first thing to be done is to boil ajwain in a brass vessel, and throw
it away outside the house. This is considered to be good for the health
of the child, and it is believed that it removes the effects of the evil
eye.
- 2. Two or three days after the birth, a widow of the family boils å
quantity of sewián (vermicelli) and cooks some rice. Then in consulta-
tion with other women of the family, especially the old hags who by
that time bave assembled, she designates one from among them to
plaster the floor of the mother's room with cowdung, and on this plas-
tered spot sit seven or at most fourteen girls of the family or of the
same tribe, while the widow draws lines of flour thereon, cutting the
whole into several squares. Then she brings in the prepared food and
all, assuming a prostrate position, offer prayers to the deity for the
mother and all the members of the family. The women bow their
heads before the girls and rub their feet, treating them as devis or
goddesses. This is called worshipping the Devi. They afterwards eat
the food.
3. The third ceremony is performed on the first Sunday of Hár
(June) of the same year. The mother is carried to a pípal tree by the
women of the family, there a chosen place is plastered and prayers are
offered in the manner already described. The words of the prayer
are:-"O pipal tree, guard us against evil.” Cooked rice is carried there
by a female barber who sings a strange and mysterious song, both
going and coming. This ceremony is generally observed on the birth
of a son. There are some other ceremonies connected with the birth
of a child, for example one which goes by the name of sawi. This is
only performed when the child is a boy. Once a year the oldest wo-
man of the family gets up early in the mornug and makes some karáh
(sugar, ghi and flour mixed and cooked together). Each article never
weighs less than five quarters of a seer whence the name sawi (14), all
the males of the family are then invited to feast on the karáh. After-
wards a he-goat is killed, some broad loaves of bread are cooked, jhol
is prepared and all these three things are eaten by the meinbers (both
male and female) of the family.*
The Labánas of Gujrát wear the janeo or sacred thread, and are
very particular about it. Even those who are Sikhs and do not cut
their hair wear it.
But in Kángra the use of it is dying out, though oven those who
ere unable to afford the cost of the rite, will don it at their wedding.
In Ludhiana the janeo is assumed at marriage, but taken off after the
phera and hung on a pipal tree.
me On the birth of a boy, in Kángya, the panjáb. ceremony is observed within 118 days
of the birth, the kindred being feasted, while the women go to worship a pípal, singing on
the way there and back. A pot of water is emptied beneath the tree and red sandal
(kongu), rice and flowers are offered to it. White cotton thread ie 'also wrapped thrice
und it in the manner of a janeo. Sweetmeat, as means allow, is also placed there and
the women how to the tree. At weddings the pair observe a similar rite.



Labảna marriage.
Marriage customs.
The prohibited degrees appear to vary in every district. Sometimes
the four-got rule is observed, sometimes it is sufficient to avoid the go:
from which a wife has been taken for seven generations, or until the
memory of any marriage with that got has faded away.
In Gujrát early marriage is preferred, and widow remarriage (karewa)
has now commenced, though it is considered degrading.* When on
occasions of marriage, janeo, etc., a feast for the got people is eaten,
the sons of a widow's remarriage are not allowed to sit with the
biradari. Only men of the same got can sit with it, and karowa
children are excluded.
The Labanas in Ludhiana celebrate a girl's wedding by phera, like
Hindus, but that of a widow by nikáh according to Muhammadan ritual.
The Arya Samaj has, however, set its face against such a confusion
of rites.
Monogamy is preferred and a Labápa will not take a second wife
unless he is obliged. The wife first married enjoys certain privileges
at religious ceremonies, but socially all the wives are on an equality.
In Kángļa marriage is avoided in Chet, Bbádon, Asauj and Poh,
and the date for the wedding should be fixed in the shukla pakhsh or
light half of a lunar month so that the 11th (ikádshi) mav fåll on one
of the days.
Wedding ceremonies.
In Sialkot the boy's father or guardian goes to the house of the
bride's father or guardian and asks him to give his daughter in
marriage to bis son. After a good deal of discussion they come to
some such agreement as that the boy's father shall pay seven or
eight score of rupees and give two or three ornaments to the girl's
father. There is no disgrace in making such a bargain, on the
contrary thu girl's father insists on a good price and argues “my
daughter is very young and good looking, therefore ten score rupees
are not much for her.” The utmost that a young girl is sold for is
ten score rupees. When the betrothal is complete the girl's father
gets half the price in advance. This payment is called bhán. The
whole price goes by the name of bol. The money is paid in the house
of the girl's father togetber with 101 cocoa-nuts and some mauli
thread. The wedding day is fixed, not as among Aindus according
to the solar months but as among Muhammadans in the lunar month,
a date of the moon being set apart for the purpose, and on that date
the marriage party proceeds to the girl's house. Twenty men usually
make up a wedding party. On the first night the girl's hands and
feet are stained with mehndi (myrtle). This is absolutely necessary
and if it is not done the party bas to turn back without being given
a meal. This is the case too if there is any default in payment of the
* In Kángra it is asserted that a widow can and cannot espouse her husband's elder
brother. Probably there is no absolute rule, but a feeling that a widow should only
marry his younger brother, or a cousin in a corresponding position.
t In Ludhiana the prices are immutably fixed at Rs. 120if the bridegroom is a child
and at Rs. 140 if he is an adult. b'xchange is reprobated in Kángra, but sales are poter
Exchanges are however said to take placo.



Labána funerals.
settled price. The boy's father performs all the ceremonies in the
house of the girl's father.
Four days later the ceremony of panch paropi is performed. The
girl's father puts sugar and ghi in some dishes and selects a number
of men of a peculiarly churlish nature to swallow their contents. The
women, who are already occupying the roofs of the various rooms,
begin to throw bricks, small pieces of stone, maize, etc., from all
directions, but the men chosen continue eating in large mouthfuls
even while they are being so assailed as they must not leave the food
unfinished but must go on eating amid the shower of 'stones, etc.
If they succeed in finishing the food they are praised by all present
for their courage.
Five days later, the couple go to a pípal tree accompanied by some
of the brotherhood. The barber's wife gives the hand of the girl into
that of the boy and they walk around the tree hand in hand thrice.
Then sweetmeats are served to the assemblage. Next the girl runs
ahead and the sooner the boy catches her the more is he praised for
his strength. On the morning of the sixth day after the wedding
the ceremony of gora is effected. The father of the boy has a he-goat
killed with a sword and then cooked. All feast on the flesh and
return home. A few days later the boy goes uninvited to his
father-in-law's house and stays there for a month or more. The
couple bids farewell to modesty in a very short time. The mukláwa
ceremony is performed five years after the wedding, and it is not unusual
to see two or three children born during this period.
Thė sati ceremony is also generally observed. Milk given by cows
and buffaloes dedicated to the sati is held sacred. They do not allow
men of other castes even to touch it. This milk is coagulated and
made into whey in a separate vessel. No member of the family who
is not deemed a true believer in the sati is allowed to drink the milk
of animals dedicated to a sati. After a week or at most a fortnight,
the milk and whey of such animals or kbir (rice and milk cooked
together) and loaves of bread cooked in ghi are carried to the sthan
(temple) of the sati and there a number of young girls of the same house-
hold or of the caste are collected together and made to eat it. True
believers in the suti are also invited to partake of it. Before eating
a portion is given to the imaginary sati. Afterwards all present
prostrate themselves, rub their foreheads on the sacred spot, and
offer up hearty prayers. If fortune thereafter smiles favourably on any
family, they ascribe it to the suti's kindness. But if anyone suffers
from bodily infirmity, moral degradation, agricultural or pecuniary
disaster he attributes it to her anger. The sati's sthán is a spot of
ground, generally outside the village, over which a real building is
sometimes raised, but in most cases the bare earth serves the purpose.
Death rites.
A curious admixture of Hindu and Musalmán rites' is sometimes
observed at death. Thus in Ludhiána a dying person is laid on the
ground, as among Hiodus, but after death the body is again put on
a bed, a fire kindled at its right hand and the hand branded. But
after this the body is buried.



Labána beliefs.
Religious ideas.
Properly speaking, the Labanas have no caste religion. Some
worship a devi or a deity, others a sati, while a good many observe
the Sikh teaching. Isolated as they were from the Hindus in the
beginning, they exhibit a total ignorance of their religious principles,
and though they have adopted several Hindu customs, they have as
yot imbibed nothing of their religion. Generally they believe in the
genii of the wood, the nixies of the water, the sati and Holi and Máta
Devis. They fully believe in magic and charms such as the efficacy
of mysterious characters written on a scrap of paper, ..,
In each village a raised platform serves as the stháie or temple of
the Devi, Here a disciple or bermit lives permanently and women.
constantly resort to this sacred spot with whey in their hands which
they present to him and ask about the future.
The serpent is worshipped on the Gugga Naumi in Gujrát. Women*
take a chúri and four chapátio and go to the hole of a serpent, where
the Bhat is present, Thị chúri and chapátis are given to the Bhát,
and cow's milk is poured into the hole. This hole is called gugga or
bámbia and is a fixed place outside the village. The Dátlas must first
worship the gugga before other casteş can do it, and this is because it
is believed that the serpent is their offspring.
The pápal is the sacred tree. On the third day after marriage the
bride and bridegroom are taken to a pípal tree, whose stem is decorated
with red colour and mauli thread. The married couple turn round the
tree and, after bowing their heads, come away.
The Holi festival.
A leading man of the village is usually employed to perform this
ceremony which is generally held in the month of Baisakh. This man
summons a drummer who standing on some high place shouts the
following words to all quarters of the village :-
Iman mun dal bhanejo, wara ghadejo ware ko ae lo lijo, Holi ko
hoko rae, hoko rae, hoko re..
“ Wet the pulse and make small round balls of it. Come ! take
away these balls and so call out the Holi, call out the Holi and
call out the Holi." -
This is known as the hoka (calling out) ceremony. When the
drummer's call has reached all the inhabitants each one according
to his means buys the necessaries for the approaching festival, which
laists for three days. Then both men and women assemble together
in some open place and shout the following words :-
: Hoko rae, hoko rae, hoko rae.
Holi ko hoko rae. .
This lasts fou full two days. On the third morning all don fine
clothes, and the women adorn their faces with gold and silver orna-
ments which are in shape and make quite different to those generally
used in the Punjab. The leader then takes a drum and walks slowly
ahead of all the villagers. With him they continue singing a mysteri-
* But in Kángra men only worship the Nág on the Guggu Naumi, women being exolad.
ed. The ritual is much the saute, bat kongu, rice, dhup (incense) and flowers are offered,
No chapátis are giveu away.



when thollect and be email
Lábar-Lahauria.
ous song while he occasionally says moro hoko rac, holi ko hoko rae. At
last, they reach the sacred spot and here they pile up old cotton plants,
dry grass, etc., and set the heap on fire. The spectators standing
round the scene make a great din while the women with dishes full of
pulse balls in their bands await the leader's orders to throw them mto
the blazing fire. Several he-goats are now killed, the heads going to
the leader while the remainder of the flesh is taken by each head of a
family to his own house. Afterwards a wrestling match is held, at
which famous wrestlers from different parts display their strength.
This ceremony is known as the dudu. Finally they assume a prostrate
attitudo before the spot sacred to the Devi Holi and then return home.
taking with them a small quantity of ashes which they keep as a pledge
of the protection for the whole year. This is the festival in Gujrát.
In Ludhiána also the Holi is observed but with somewhat different
rites. A particular spot is set apart for its celebration and there a pice
and a betel nut are buried. Over them a heap of cow-doing cakes is
piled and set alight, being watched with as much solicitude 'as &
woman in her confinement. Next evening when the fire has burnt
out the people of the village and its peighbourhood collect and search
in the ashes for the pice and nut, and whoever finds them will be ex-
tremely fortunate. It is believed that whoever finds one will also find
the other as they cannot be found separat-ly. This rite is explained by
the following legend :-
Bhagat Prahlád's father hated him for his devotion to God, and after
several devices to kill him had failed he bade him sit in a burning
fire on his sister's lap. She believed herself to be fire-proof, but when
put to the test she was burnt to death while Prahlád escaped..
After this observance, disputes are laid before the kindred for
settlement. Fines are imposed on offenders or they are out-casted, and
those who have complied with the orders of the kindred are re-admitted
into caste. Next day they re-assemble and hold a feast at which men
and women dance together and throw the usual coloured water on one
another. Dancing and singing they go from house to house, and if
any house is not visited its owner takes offence.
Lábar, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Ladaána, (1) a sept of the Siáls; (2) a Ját clan (agricultural) found in
Multán.
LADHAR, a tribe of Játs, found in Sialkot. Claims descent from its eponym,
a Rájput, through Kilas who settled in that District.
LADNíán, one who keeps pack cattle.
Laghárí, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Shabpur: see Leghári.
LÁGÆRI HAZÁRA, a tomán described as lying between the country of the
Wardag Afgháns and the Maidán-i-Rustam, between the Tochi and the
Kurram. The Hazára, who were probably Mughals to judge from their
name, were attacked by Khwaja Jalál-ud Din Mahmúd under Humáyun's
orders and their sheep and cattle driven of to Kábul, in 1552.
LÁHAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
LAHAURÍ, -16, an inhabitant of Lahore: especially applied to a group of
the KHATRIS.



10
Lahi-Láhula.
Jadí, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
LAHOR, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
LÁBIL, a tribe of Játs fouud in Ludbiána. They worship a jathera and
perform the jandián rite at weddings, but not the chhatra. The
bridegroom's uncle or elder brother cats the jandián, going out to the
place where the tree is, and bowing to it. The jandián are cut with
an axe or sword. The bride and bridegroom play with twigs (chhițián),
first the bridegroom hitting tbe bride with them seven times and the
bride then treating him in the same way. The walls of the house are
afterwards marked with rice flour. Sultán is also worshipped. Tłe
puja articles at a marriage are given to a Brahman.
LÁHULA, LÁHULI, incorrectly Láhauli, an inhabitant of Láhul, which lies
partly in British territory and partly in Chamba. British Lábul com-
prises three valleys, Rangloi or the valley of the Chandra, Gárá or
Punán, the valley of the Bhága, and Pattan, or the valley of the united
river, the Chenáb, below the confluence of the Chandra with the
Bhaga.
ya
The people of British Láhul are divided into an upper class of Thá-
kurs, who correspond to the Rájputs of the Himalayan area : Brah-
mans, who are only found in Pattan and are descended from immigrants
from Chamba-Láhul and other tracts to the south : Kanets, who
form the middle and most numerous class : and the lower classes,
consisting of Shipis or Dágis and Lohárs with a few Sunárs, Baráras
and Hensis. "The Dágis, Lohárs, Baráras, Hensis, etc., seem to have no
gots and all intermarry, though they refuse to marry with the lowest
caste of all, the Shipis. There are also a few Lamas, chiefly in Gárá,
where a certain number of nuns (chorno) are also found.
The Kanets of Láhul offer a few points of interest Many of
them in Pattan are no doubt descendants of settlers from Kullu
or Bangáhal, but the rest, and all the Kanets of Gárá and Rangloi
are pure Tibetans or nearly so. The Láhula, however, now looks
upon the term Botia (Tibetan) as a term of reproach. The Kauets in
Lábul are divided into the following gots :-
i. Lonchen-pá or the wazírs.
vi. Hirida-pá, or archers: a story is told to
ii. (Ky)Chungo.pá or vultures.
account for the name.
iii. Darpá (seems to have no meaning). vii. Kapúr, said to have come from the
iv. Hensar-pá (Hensar is a Kullu caste). I
plains.
v. Dantur-pá (Grantur-pá).
| viii. Kyechhag-pá.
The Thákurs, who are the gentry and quondam rulers of Láhul,
are mora or less pure Tibetans by blood, but are beginning to assert
a Rájput origin. They take Kanet women as srújut or concubines
(suret), but not as full wives (láhri), and the sons of such women,
who are styled chunma or workers, are not considered pure Thákurs
at first, but in a few generations their descendants regain Thakur
status. The Țhákurs in Láhul appear to have three gotras or exo«
gamous sub-divisions :
i Gautam (or Chandla) descended from the moon.
ii. Buramshing-pá (lit. sugar-cane) in Sanskrit Asháku, said to be a Surajbansi clan.
iii. Phág-pá, Jamsher-pá, or Aryá Jamsher.pá. (Phág.yal=Arya-varth).



Láhula tenures.
11
Similarly Brahmans take Kanet women to wife, and their sons
succeed; and though the Brahman father will not oat from such a son's
hands he may smoke with him. Such sons are called gurús, but call
themselves Brahmans, but they in turn warry Kanet wives or women
of mixed caste if they can find any.
Thákurs, Brahmans, and Kanets will all smoke together in Lábul,
and Brahmans will drink water, tea or lugri (rice-beer) from a Kanet's
hand, but will not eat even sachi roți, which appears to be equivalent
to pakki roţi. Thákurs will eat pakki or sachi roți from a Kanet's
hands, but not kachi, but those Thákurs who wear no janeo will do so.
The Kanets do not wear the janeo.
The main class distinction, as in other Tibetan countries, appears to
be that between the agriculturists, who form the great mass of the
population, and the wage-earning classes; but this line of demarcation,
though it prevents intermarriage, does not separate the classes in the
rigid way that the institution of caste would do. The artisan classes
nevertheless have their distiuciions--see under Lohár.
But the most interesting thing about the Láhula population is its
economic system. This merits full description as it is a good 6xample
of a small, self-contained, ancient polity.
The allotments of fields,* supposed to have been made authoritatively
at a remote period, and to have been originally all equal, subject to the
same rent or tax and each liable to furnish one man for service or
forced labour to the lord, appear to have been indivisible and in Gárá
and Rangloi, the Tibetan valleys, are in fact still almost all undivided.
Land reclaimed from the waste was formed into separate allotments, or
added to an existing allotment with a corresponding increase in its
burdens.
The great bulk of the allotments are held by the yulfa or villagers,
each of them being on an average about five acres in area. Some small
miscellaneous holdings are held rent-free in lieu of service to the com.
munity. Such are :
i. The gar-zing
(blacksmiths,
iš „ be-zing
Sheld by the
b) musicians (Hensis),
iri. n onpo-zing
og jodhsis or astrologers,
iz. „ man-zing )
(beds or physicians.
Probably the Lohárs, jodhsis and beds could have been evicted in
times past by the community or tbe Thakur, but the general idea now
seems to be that they could not be dispossessed, however inefficient.
The Hensis' tenure is however more precarious, as thoy appear to hold
solely at the Thakur's pleasure.
The Thákurs hold certain kothis or groups of hamlets in fief or jágír.
and are owners of the waste within the limits of their kothis. The
arable land is either held rent-free by bis dotoent or cadet branches of
.
'
.
.
* Zing kom is a local word 1186d to describe such an allotment. A xing koin chongpu or
full allotment, varies from three to seven acres in extent according to quality of the soil.
Some few families only lield a half allotment or zing kom fitka
+ The dotoen is ciearly the dothair or cadet (Skr. Dwistaniya), a term applied to cadet
branches of Rájput septs in Gurdaspur,



12.
Láhula inheritance.
his family, or rent-free, but in lieu of continuous service, by his cháksis
or family retainers ; while his garhpân or demesne land is cultivated
by a class called káng chumpa or farm servants (literally cottagers).
A dotoen family sinks after a time, when the sense of relationsbip to
the Thákur has become faint, to the status of cháksis and is then liable
for service. . A dotoen's holding is about one or two allotments
(5 to 10 acres) on an average, a cháksi's from 24 to 5 acres, and
a cottager's about 14 acres. The nature and extent of the services
rendered varies, but the general principle is that the burden on each
allotment is fixed. Mortgages are not uncommon and even a cháksi
or a cottager may mortgage his holding, provided that the mortgagee
paid a full rent if he or the mortgagor failed to render the customary
service.
Among the subordinate landholders all sons are considered entitled
to equal shares of their father's holding, but in practice they seldom
divide, and live on with wife, land, house and chattels in common.
When asked to defend this repulsive custom of polyandry, they say
that their holdings are too small to divide, and that experience shows
them that it is impossible for two sisters-in-law, with separate husbands
and families, to live together, whereas two or more brothers with a
common wife can agree.
In such families the custom which has hitherto prevailed, with
regard to inheritance of the shares of brothers who die without issue,
is quite clear: such share has always gone to the brothers with whom
the deceased lived in unison, or to his issue, to the exclusion of
all claim on the part of the separated branch of the family. The
most exceptional point in the custom of inheritance prevailing in
Láhui is the fact that, in default of sons, a daughter succeeds to her
father's whole estate in preference to nephews or other male kinsmen,
provided that, before her father's death she has not married and
settled down to live on her husband's holding away from home. If
she is married and living with her husband in her father's house, she
succeeds, and if she is unmarried, she can hold for life as a maid,
or can at any time marry and take her husband to live with her.
Supposing such a husband and wife to die without issue, it appears to
be doubtful who would have the best claim to succeed them, whether
the next of kin to the wife or to the husband. But it is agreed that
the survivor of the two might lawfully give the estate to any member
of either of the two families.
At first sight of the people of Láhul or Spitr you porceive that you
have left India, and are among a Tartar or Mongol race. The figure
both of men and women are short and stout, their complexions are a
ruddy brown instead of a black-brown or dusky yellow, their faces are
broad and flat, with high cheek bones and oblique eyes, they have
broad mouths and flat noses with wide nostrils. In fact, none of them
can be said to be handsome, and the old women are quite hideous, the
only redeeming point is the look of honesty and smiling good humour
to be recognised in almost every countenance. In those parts of
Láhul in which there is most admixture of Hindu blood, the blending
of the two types is very clearly distinguishable.



13
Láhula customs.
Customs connected with birth, marriage and death.
The best general account of the social customs of the Botiás will
be found in Cunningham's Ladakh, but even in Spiti and Lábul,
especially in the latter, the practices of the present day will be
found to differ in some details. At almost every observance the
religious ceremony consists in the simple reading of prayers or
passages from the holy books by a láma, while the whole company
of men and women sit round with clasped hands and downcast
eyes, and repeat the verses after him. The social celebration of all
these events consist mainly of feasts in which much chang is drunk,
The decisive point in the negotiation for a betrothal is the acceptance
or refusal of a pot of chang sent to the bride's father; if he drinks,
the affair is settled without more words. Polyandry, or the taking
to wife one woman by several brothers, is a recognised institution, and
is very general, the object is to prevent the division of estates. Sir
James Lyall describes a case which came before him in which one of two
brothers living in polyandry much wished to separately marry a girl
by whom he had had an illegitimate child, but the wife of his family
objected strongly, claiming both brothers as husbands, and refusing to
admit another woman into the household, and she eventually prevailed.
Among the Kanets the age of betrothal is any time between 10 and
20 years of age for both parties. It depends apparently on their means.
The wedding is solemnised one or two months after the betrothal.
Among the Kanets the man sends a relative to the girl's house and
he conducts the negotiations. At his second visit he takes a rupee and
some such as a present. The day for the betrothal is fixed by the
iotshi or astrologer. Then on the day fixed the man's family go in a
body to fetch the girl. The ceremony is attended by Brahmans or
lámas and sometimes by both and the Shastras are read.
The bride receives as dower (i) the zori (istridhan) which is given
her by her parents, (ii) the gotan, which is given her by her husband
and is recoverable by him, and (iii) the Thákurs and sometimes even
Kanets give some land to be held independently for life by the bride ;
this corresponds to the Kullu chhethi. Further, as in Kullu, the woman
often takes an agreement stipulating for the chhethi etc., and provid-
ing for her separate maintenance in the event of her husband marrying
a second wife, which is usually done when the first is barren. Divorce
seems free.
In Láhul cattle are not slaughtered nowadays (except perhaps in
some villages at the head of the Bhága Valley, and there it is done
with the greatest secrecy), but five or six sheep are killed in each
house at the beginning of the winter ; the flesh dries, and will then
keep good for any number of years; the older the meat, the greater
the delicacy to the taste of a Láhuli. The principal food of the
Láhuli is buck-wheat, boiled whole and eaten as gruel, or roasted
and made into flour, which is then baked into cakes or mixed with
chang beer, and formed into dumplings.
The Buddhists, half-Buddhists, Lohárs, and Shipis always eat any
sheep or goats which have died from fatigue or disease, and some of
them eat also calves, oxen or yaks which have been killed by a fall



s, espine villagslanglang, but there bird Hall the
Láhula houses, etc.
Irom rocks or otherwise, but this is done secretly. When at Keylang
a calf happens to die in the morning, it remains where it fell the whole
day, nobody touching it, but the dead body certainly disappears during
the night, and many bones, especially during winter, of such animals
may be seen lying about near the villages, but dead asses and ponies
are only left to the eagles and foxes. Slaughtering yaks during winter
is still practised at some villages above Keylang, but it is done very
secretly, and nobody will acknowledge the fact. There is a small
temple with the image of a lhá near Yanample. Every third year a
yak" is sacrificed there, the victim being supplied in turn by all the
Liothís of Láhul. This custom dates from the time of the Kullu Rájás
who (as the god is said to be the same as that of the Dungri temple
near Manali in Kullu) ordered that one buffalo was to be offered (as at
Dungri) every third year. Since Láhul has become British territory,
yaks have taken the place of buffaloes. The Shipis eat the flesh of the
sacrificed yak,
Wheaten flour is generally eaten in Láhul. Butter and butter milk
are regular articles of diet in both countries. Chang, a kind of beer
brewed from rice and barley, is drunk generally, and tea and a kind of
whisky by those who can afford it.
In Láhul the houses are smaller than they are in Spiti, and less care
and taste are expended in building and adorning them. Ordinarily the
upper storey consists of an interior or winter room, an outer or summer
room, and a verandah room open on the fourth side. In this verandah
stands the loom, inside will be found large corn chests made of slate set
in wooden frames, large stone bowls from Iskardu, iron cauldrons, and
cooking pots, an iron tripod or pot stand, some wooden dishos, and a
few earthen pots from Kullu. Many pack-saddles for sheep and goats
are strewed about, and a few blankets and thick sheep-skin coats hang
on the walls. Swall holes in the wall serve the purpose both of
windows and chimneys: bedsteads are unknown, Grass is stacked
on the roof, and wood for fuel inside. This is a fair description of
a house in the upper valleys of Láhul ; in the lower villages tbe rooms
are larger and better ventilated. In Gárá many of the houses are
built together in one block with connecting passages by which com.
munication is kept up in the winter without going out, which, when
the snow is very deep, may be scarcely possible. Making thread is
the chief occupation in winter; on fine days the loom is brought out,
and some weaving is done. Both men and women work the loom in
Lábul.
In Láhul the dress of the men is much the same as that worn in
Kullu, the only difference being that the coat is longer and of thicker
and darker cloth, and that trousers are always worn, the women, on
the other hand, dress like those of Spiti (see under Tibetan), except
that straw sandals replace the long boots. It is not easy at first to
distinguish a Láhuli nun, if young, from a lad, as they shave their heads
and dress like men.
Ancient belief in Láhul.
Withont doubt there existed a very low kind of religion in Lahul
before Budhism got hold of the people, and the latter has not been



Láhula beliefs.
15
able to suppress it entirely. The early religion of Láhul is still known
under the name of 'Lung-pachhoi,' that is, 'the religion of the valley.'
When it was flourishing many bloody, and even human, sacrifices seem
to have been regularly offered up to certain lhá, gods or evil spirits
residing in or near old pencil.cedar trees, caves, etc. This cruel custom
disappeared gradually after the doctrine of the Buddhists had influ-
enced for a time the minds of the people. There is a story which I
shall relate, as it seems to show that this was the case. Near the vil-
lage of Kyelang a large dry pencil-cedar was stan ting till last year,
when we felled it for fre-wood : the story goes that before this tree, in
ancient times, a child of 8 years old was annually sacrificed to make the
spirit who resided in it well-disposed towards the inhabitants of Kyelang.
The children seem to have been supplied in turn by the different
families of the village. It happened one year to be a widow who bad
to give up an old child of the required age of eight years. The day
before her only one was to be taken from her she was crying loudly,
when a travelling láma from Tibet met her, and asked the cause of her
distress. Having heard her story the láma said: “Well, I will go
instead of your child. He did so but did not allow himself to be killed :
(the spirit must kill me himself if he wants human flesh,' said he, so
saying he sat himself down before the tree and waited for a long time;
but as the demon made no attack on him, he became angry, took down
from the tree the signs and effigies, and threw them into the Bhága river,
telling the people not to sacrifice any more human beings, which advice
was followed from that time forward. The demon fled and settled on
the top of the Koko pass, where it still dwells under the name of the
Kyelang lhá or god of Kyelang, getting now only the annual sacrifice
of a sheep supplied by the shepherds. In the time when the Lung-
pachhoi was the only religion that existed in the valley, there were
doubtless more places in Láhul where human beings were immolated
to supposed gods and evil spirits. At present, near not a few villages
sheep and goats are yearly killed and offered up (contrary to the pre-
cepts of Buddhism) to evil-disposed lhús, and it may be that animals
have now taken the place of men. The people lowever still continue
to believe in a great many spirits or demons known as lhás, who are
supposed to dwell in trees, rocks, or on the hill tops, and before whom
the Buddhists (contrary to their religion) sacrifice sheep and goats. In
addition, they believe greatly in witches, sorcerers, and the evil eye,
and have a host of other superstitions in common with all the other
Láhulis.
The religion of the people is nominally Buddhism, but it is becoming
nominally Hinduism. Thus the god of the Pass is la-tse, zhing-lhá
is the field god and lu and tsan are the river and mountain gods.
The lu is said to be a nag or snake deity and is worshipped with milk
and water. His shrine is usually a spring and it is kept clean. Women
do not worship him. The pile of horns (ibex) often seen on top of a
house in Láhul is the lhá-lho or gods' boundary. A demon commonly
believed in is Kargreta (lit. one-ear) who is in man's shape with one
arm, one leg, etc. He is said not to be worshipped now at all.
Expiatory ceremonies of various kinds are common, the tanojar or
priest (corr, to the gur of Kullu) being employed, just as in Kullu the



Láhula beliefs.
gur (guru) or chela has much more to do with popular religion than the
Brahman, with whom the Buddhist láma closely corresponds. Thus
the jhingsha ceremony (called in Kulla hawan) of building a miniature
house of sticks, filling it with flour, etc., and burning it, is performed
to avert evil from a new house, and sometimes on other occasions.
The Shipis seem to receive the ministrations of Bhot priests only,
while the other castes have various divinities, e. 9., Mahadeo in Patan :
Hirmadevi at Sissu (said to be the Kullu Jamlu) : Gantal Davi called
Chahja-mon equivalent to Káli Devi, and also T'su'dag-mo=Ján-málika
or the lady of life : Devi Yamso at Kyelang : Buddha Gaya : Shakya
Tub-ba: Padma Sambha, said to have come from Ujjain : and Guru
Rinboche.
Religious ceremonies connected with agriculture.
The Lánulis observe certain ceremonies of a religious nature in con-
nection with the cultivation of their fields. A lámá, who understands the
astrological books, names the auspicivus day on which ploughing should
be commenced (this day falls always between the 8th and 22nd of
May). After the fields have been ploughed and sown, & procession
goes round all the fields, preceded by one or two lámás and two drums,
some of the company carrying at the same time several large religious
books on their backs, this done, the whole company sits down in the
fields near the villages and feasts on cakes and chang supplied jointly
by all the land-holders. All this is done to secure the sprouting up of
the seeds sown, after that the water-course for irrigating the fields is
repaired, on which occasion a sheep is offered up to the lhá which is
supposed to have special care of the water-course. Again, as soon as
the seeds have sprouted, another ceremony is performed; this onsists
in sticking small branches of the pencil-cedar here and there in the
field, and burning incense, while some members of the family sit down,
eat, and drink a little, and murmur some prayers. This is to ensure
that each grain which has sprung up may prosper and produce many
ears. When the fields are nearly ripe, a goat or sheep is killed in
honor of the lhá, in several villages horse-races are held at the same
time. Till the festival of the ripening grain has been celebrated, no-
body is allowed to cut grass or any green thing with a sickle made of
iron, as in such case the field.god would become angry and send frost
to destroy or injure the harvest. If, therefore, a Láhuli wants grass
before the harvest sacrifice, he must cut it with the sickle made of the
horn of an ox or sheep, or tèar it off with the hand. Infractions of
this role were formerly severely punished, at present a fine of one or
two rupees suffices, which goes into the pocket of the jágirdár or the
village headman. The iron sickle is used as soon as the harvest has
been declared to be commenced by the performunce of the sacrifice.
The Láhulis of Chamba.
The Láhulis of Chamba-Láhul, which forms part of the Pángi wizárat
include Brahmans, Rájputs, Thákurs and Ráthis, with the follow-
ing low castes :-Hális, Lohárs and Dákis. These castes are all en-
dogamous. There are Bhots in tbe Miyár Nálá, but the Láhulis proper
have no communion with them.
The only families in Chamba-Láhul claiming Rájput descent are those
of the Ránás of Trilok Náth and Margraon. The Rána of Trilok Náth



The Láhulis of Chamba.
17
intermarries with Rána families in the Rávi and Beás valloys: the Ráná
of Margraon intermarries with Thákurs and Ráthis in Láhul. Both of
those families are probably of Tibetan origin.
Among the high castes marriage is prohibited within three degrees
of relationship on either side. The marriage customs of the Láhulis are
similar to those of Pangi. The boy's father goes to the girl's house
accompanied by a friend and if an alliance is arranged'he returns and
pays a rupee to the girl's father; this is called tangrandi or suthri.
There are two forms of marriage; the superior form being called byáh.
Sunday and Monday are regarded as good days for a marriage. On
the appointed day the bridegroom goes with his friends to the bride's
house, where all are seated, the bridal pair being placed side by side
with the bride on the left. A totu of sattu is prepared and the bride's
maternal uncle presents a portion to them with arms crossed, as in
Pángi, and then to the rest of the assembled company. This observ.
ance is called marpi. A feast follows with drinking, dancing and singing.
In the morning the bride's parents and friends present the surij or
marriage gifts, and the bridegroom gives the bandha or urnaments
to the bride, one rupee each to his father and mother-in-law. The
bridal party then returns to the bridegroom's house, and at the door
the bridegroorn's mother meets them with a totu of sattu, a lotá of water,
incense and a sheep. The warna ceremony is performed as in Pangi
and the sheep killed and given to Hális. They then enter the house
when the totu ot sattu is distributed to all, beginning with the bridal
pair, by the boy's maternal uncle. A feast follows with singing and
dancing. The girl's parents do not accompany the procession, only her
brother and other relatives and no money payment is made to them
on their departure. The phirauni ceremony is observed as in Pangi.
A modified form of polyandry exists in Chamba-Láhul. At the time of
the phirauni the younger brother of the / bridegroom accompanies the
party and presents Re. I to the girl's mother which establishes his right
as a second husband. More than two are not allowed. The custom of
carrying away the bride privately is also common in Lahul.
Widow remarriage, called topi láni, is practically the same as in
Pángi. A widow cannot now be compelled to marry her deceased hus.
band's brother, and may appeal to the court for protection, both in
Pángi and Láhul, if compulsion is attempted. Divorce is l'ecoyuized
and usually two or three respectable persons are present on the occasion.
The husband and wifo hold a piece of .thread between them and
break it by pulling in opposite directions. If both are consenting parties
no money payment is made, otherwise the payment is made by the
party wishing the divorce, and is called mán.
Death'observances are much the same as in Pangi; children under one
year and lepers being buried and all others burnt and the ashes throwr
in to the Chandra Bhága. For eight days after the death only one meal
a day is eaten, called upás, and on tho ninth day a feast is given to the
noar relataves, which practically ends the period of mourning.
Those who can afford it raise monolith slabs (dhaj)* and other
memorials to the dead. The period of impurity is 8 days for all purposes.
* For some notes on these commemoratiou stones, seo App. H of Francke's History of
Western Tibeta



-
Pestivals in Chamba Láhul.
The only tenure in Láhul is called gháí or ghári, i.e., an equal divi-
sion of the crop between landlord and tenant.
The chief festivals in Chamba-Láhul are the following :-
1. The Brishu on 1st Baisakh, which is observed as in Pangi.
2. The Pori mela is observed only in Trilok Náth, and is accom-
panied by dancing and drinking. Held in Bhadon.
3. The Rhaul mela observed as in Pangi.
to The Kun mela is the same as the Sib mela in Pangi. It is also
called Chár add is held on the new moon of Phágan. The
evening is spent in eating and drinking, and on the follow-
ing day.
5. The Or mela is held on the full moon of Phágan, in Trilok
Náth and Margraon, and like the other melas the chief ac-
companiment is drinking and dancing.
Lábul is the meeting place of the Aryan and Mongolian races and the
peuple exhibit the cbaracteristics of both, though the Argan element
predominates. Their religion is an impure Buddhism grafted on the
ancient and probably aboriginal Nág and Devi worship which is
similar to that of Pángi and is found as far up as the junction of the
Chandra and Bhági rivers-Chortens, prayer flags, máni walls and
other symbols of Buddhism are common. The Buddhist temple is
at Trilok Náth and the chief Devi shrine is that of Mirkula Deri at
Udaipur.
Mr. A. H. Francke thinks that the original worship of Trilok Náth
and Mirkula was an aboriginal form of Shiva and Kálí worship.
When Buddhism entered the country Shiva was identified with Ava-
lokita, and the Káli of Mirkula with Vajravaráhi who is still worshipped
there by the Tibetans.
The results of Sir Thomas Holland's measurements of the Lábul
Kauets* went to show the population of the Láhul villages now contains
very little unaltered Tibetan blood, whilst there are apparently some
individuals who uniformly tend towards the lodian type. The evidence
of the cephalic, naso-malar and vasal indices, stature and facial angle,
unifortoly points to the presence of a large proportion of Tibetan
blood in the Láhul Kanets, but no precise idea of the quantitative
relatious of the Indian to the Tibetan strain can be formed on our
present data. The Kanets of Láhul include a certain number of
immigrant families from the Kullu side and they have not been long
enough in the country to have their bloud tainted by intermarriage
with those who have Tibetan blood
Valuable as these measurements were it is perhaps to be regretted
that those made in the different valleys, Pattan, Gára and Rangloi,
were not distinguished, as the elements in eacb valley aro believed to
vary. Moreover the possible aboriginal elemeut in the valleys,
especially in the remoter hamlets, caliput be disregarded. It is now
established that there is a Mundari element in the language of Kanaur
results of how tbe population whilst there a type. The evlan
* The Kanets of Kulu and Láhul, Punjab. A Study in Contact.Metamorphism, in Journal
f the Anthropological Inst., 1902.



Lak-Lakhwayya.
19
and thoro may well be, in the population of the Punjab Himalayas, a
Munda element which is represented by the Mons or Monpa.
LAK, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur, Mont-
gomery and Multán. In the latter District they claim Punwar
origin and kinship with the Langáhs. Originally ousted from the
Chenab by the Sikhs, a small number of Laks are now settled in the
Chenab Colony. Formerly notorious cattle-thieves, they are now of
very minor importance.
LAKERA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
LÁKha, a sept of Muhammadan Játs which owns a few villages in Rájanpur
tahsil, Dera Gházi Khán, and is also said to be found in Muzaffargarh.
It claims kinship with the Mahras, Kurejas and Sáha-sumra (?)
Játs, and assigns its origin to Lakha Lirháni in the Brahui country
beyond Jacobábád whence they migrated under Samáil Alí and
Kambír. The latter was Nawáb of Dera Gházi Khán under the
Kalhoras and his son Nawáb of Dájil until expelled by Nasír Khán
Brahui.
LAKHANPÁL, a sept of Rájputs.
Laksári, a writer or draughtsman : cf. lakhwayyá.
LAKHERA, (1) one of the principal muhins or clans of the Kharrals, with head.
quarters at Kot Kamália* in Montgomery. At feud with the Kbarrals
of the Upper Ráví it allied itself to the Káthias and other lower
Ráví tribes. To this clan belonged Saádatyár Khán, son of Malábat
Khán, a chief who held some post at the Delhi court under Alamgir.
His jágír is said to have been worth Rs. 1,09,000 a year, but a proposa!
to betroth the daughter of Ghází Khán, the eighth Siál chief, to him
was regarded as an insult, and he was unable to protect his country
against the Sials of Jhang and eventually the chiefs of Kamália
were reduced to tálukdárs under the Nikkáí Sikhs ; (2) one who gathers
gum-lac.
Lákoí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
LAKHIWÁL, a Ját tribe. According to a confused traditiont the Lakhiwal
claim Bhatti origin, and to be also Játus by family. They say that
Bhatti and Samija came from Muttra to Hissár. Samija had no son,
but froin his daughter are descended the Joiyas. Some generations
after Bhatti came Rájá Rasálu who had two sons Dasal and Jaisal.
The latter became Rájá of Jaisalmer, but Jaisal remained in Bhatti (-ána)
and had a son named Janrs, who had several wives of various castes.
By them he had 21 sons who founded a number of tribes such as the
Lakhiwál and Sidhu-Barár Jáțs and the Wațţu and Mai Rajputs.
LAKANÁNA, a clan of the Siáls.
LAKHWAYYA, a writer, a drawer of pictures, also one who understands, one
who passes by or over : cf. LAKHÁRI.
..
wawija came from Muttra to Alianza
* An old town, re-founded by Kamál Khán Lakhera in the 14th century.
+ Recorded by Amín Chand, Hissár Sett. Rep., 1875.
$ Cf. the tradition given on p. 102 supra,



20
Lakwera-Lúlbegi.
LAKWERA, & Ját clan (Agrioaltaral) foond in Multán.
Larzaí, a Pathán olan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
LÁLAI, a branch of the Wazir Patháng, now settled on the northern slopes
of the Snfed Koh in Nangrahár. Tolnai is said to have been the son
of Sulaiman, son of Kakai, and to have fled from the Birmil hills on
account of a blood-feud.
LALÁRAN, fem. -í, of Lilári, q. v.
LALARE, a section of Rájputs.
LÁLBEGI, a worshipper of Lalbeg who appoars to be also called Balá Shah
the mythical high priest of the Chuhrás and other castes of similar
status. Further it is at least highly probable, as Sir Denzil Ibbetson
pointed ont,* that Balá Sháh is Balmík, the traditional author of
the Ramáyana, and if so, Lál beg or Bálá Sháh is merely a Muham-
madanised dame and title for that Hindu saint. According to Sir
Richard Temple the legend goes that Shiva once rubbed his hand on a
red stone, lál batta, and Lálbeg came out. Possibly he suggests, Lal-
beg is a corruption of Lal Bhikshu, “the red monk" (.e., Shiva him-
self). Templet also records a legend which certainly points to the earth-
god Shiva as the pretotype of Lalbeg. , Once the Prophet with Mihtar
Iliás and other saints was sitting in God's court, Ilias spat and his
spittle fell on the prophets, so the Almighty bade Iliás" serve as a
sweeper, but he begged that an intercessor for him might be born.
Iliás was then himself born into the world as a sweeper, but lived in
the hope of forgiveness and one day the Great Saint or Pír gave him
his coat to wear. Iliás placed it in a pitcher of earth and when asked
by the Great Saint why he did not wear it replied that he feared to
soil it. But the Saint bade him don it and come to him. Iliás was.
however, unable to open the pitcher and brought it to the Saint whó
said: “ Come out, Lálbeg, quickly." (Lál means " my son ".
From the pitcher emerged a fair man wearing lál beg red clothes.is
i, e., bhekh. Him the Saint designated as the prophet of the sweepers
and Iliás took him home, filled his hiiga for him and worshipped him.
To this day the sweepers fill the pipe for it religious teacher. Lalbec
at once became invisible, because he disapproved of lliás' beliefs. and
the Saint bade him do penance promising that Lálbeg should intercede
for him, and saying that in the first age the ghatmat or vessel worship.
ped to represent Lálbeg would be golden, in the next of silver, in the
third of copper and in the fourth of earth, and so the Mihtars or
sweepers now worship vessels of earth. But another legend makes
Lalbeg the son of a Mughal woman who was barren until at Bálmik's
prayer she bore a son. And yet a third makes him the gon of Shaikh
Sarná of Multán. His mother dedicated him to Balmík and he even-
* Punjab Census Report, 1889, $ 295, note 3,
+ Indian Antiquary, XI, p. 280. A fuller variant, given in P. N. Q. II, 122, discloses a
close, if obscura, connection between Lálbeg and Gorakh Nath, who is so prominent in the
Jogig: mythology. Shiva's madan was one day robbed by Parmeshar on a stone and
produced Lálbeg: some on a rend (sarkanda) whence sprang Sarkanda Náth: some on
nudung iqobar), whence Gobar Nátb, and some was cast into a river and swallowed by a
fish who brought forth Machhendar Náth, Gorakh Náth's preceptor.
I PN. Q., I., 586.
8" Ib. I., 837.



21
Lálbegi mythology.
tually conquered Kábul and Kashmir, but he placed one Sultáni on his
throne and retired to Thánesar where Bálmík's tomb is still worshipped.
Then at Delhi, whither Lálbeg went with all his followers, he founded
the religion named after himself and divided his disciples into five sects,
the Lalbegi, Shaikhri, Dúmrí, Híli and Ráwat. The Lalbegi Mihtars of
Thánosar and Karnál affect Bíbí Dhiáni, as well as Lálbeg himself,
offering her chúrís (bracelets), henna and a dorí kú parándũ, or hair
ribbon, but all that we know of Dhiáni is that she was a relative of
Lálbeg. * Pundri, mentioned as a daughter of Balmík, does not appear
to be worshipped, nor does Sattí Chuhrí, his wife. Lál Gurú is another
pame of Lálbeg and he is also called Bhangi, which was a title of the
rákshasa Aronakarit, Aruna Karata, “the red crow," an ancient tribal
deity,
Thus popular mythology persists not only in distinguishing Bálmík
from Lálbeg, but also in attributing to each of them a family and
disciples. But one forin of the myth denies to Lálbeg iny human or
natural origin and makes him but an emanation of Bálmík. The latter
used to sweep Bhagwán's court-room, and the Almighty gave him a
dress which Bálmík buried in a pit. When asked by the Almighty
why he did not wear it he went to the pit and found a boy in the robe.
According to one story Bálmík protested that he had no milk for the
babe, and was directed to go home and give it to the first auimal
which crossed his path. On his road to Earth Bálmík saw a
hare suckling her young and to her he gave the child. So to
this day no sweeper will eat a hare.t But this version does not
appear to be current in the Punjab, where it is said, at least in
Nábha, that some Chuhșás do not eat hare's flesh because a Chuhrá
once killed a cow's calf by accident and hid io under a basket. When
the owner tracked his calf to the Chuhra's house the latter said that
a hare was hidden beneath the basket and when it was overturned a
hare was found instead of the dead calf. But in Gurgaon the Sus
Gobar got of the Chuhrás is the only one which observes his tabu aud
that only because the hare once bore the name of that got. In Mont-
gomery the Muhammadan Chuhrás do not eat the hare's. Alesh if they
are followers of the Makhdúm Jaháníán of Uch as that Pír forbade it's
use. Other Chuhrás can eat it.
As already noted Bálmík is probably to be identified with the author
of the Ramágara, but one story is that there is another Bálmik o of
low degree", and concerning him various legends are current. The
most popular version represents Bálmík as a great robber, who was a
Bhíl. Once he attacked the seven rishis, but in compliance with their
remonstrances he asked his parents to join him. Their refusal cut
him to the quick and he turned faqir. A less common version runs :
When Yudisthira had performed an aswamedh jag and all present had
feasted, the bell did not sound of its own accord, as it should have done,
to announce the completion of the rites. So it was thought that ther
had been irregularly done or that some bhagat had not attended the
* P.N.Q., I.,:663.
t. Ib. 1., 881.



22
The Lálbegis and Bålmík.
feast. Accordingly Bálmík was invited and when served by Draupadı
with 36 various dishes he mixed them altogether, which in Draupadi's
eyes stamped him as indeed one of low caste. Nevertheless the bell
now rang and the rites were thus dnly completed, the only defect
being Draupadi's contempt for Bülmik, which she was exhorted to
forgeto*
According to Mr. H. L. Williams Lalbeg is represented by a red
pennon on a red pole, while Bálmik's insignia is a broom of peacock's
feathers at the end of a bamboo. Both are carried in procession attend.
ed by dholaks or drums.
Pír Chhata is also said to be an ancestor of the Chuhrás who gained
sanctity by removing a cow's caroase when no one else would do so,
but he is doubtless identical with Bálmík of whom a similar legend is
told. Once a man bade his youngest son remove a dead cow, but he
refused. Each son in turn refused also, until he came to the eldest of
his four sops, Bálmík, who obeyed his father in spite of his knowledge
that it was the duty of the low-caste Hatiáras to remove dead cattle.
His father's promise to re-admit him into the family was not fulfilled
and his descendants too became known as Hatiáras.
beyod hidrountil he can dead cow, legend is
With the cult of Bálmík is associated, round about Amritsar, that
of Míán Siúra, himself a Chuhrá, who became a devotee. Once Qází
Dáná tested his powers by making him sit on a sheet spread
over the mouth of a well and say his prayers. T'he Qází expected to
see him fall into the well, but he did not, and whenever he cooked the
flesh of a cat or a dog for his food and began to eat it the animal
came to life and fell at his feet. The Chuhrás perform a jag in his
honour and that of Bálmík and give alms in the names of both those
saints.
In Sirmúr Bálmík has a makán, pakka or kachha, in front of which
is lighted a fire and on this ghi is poured. The offerings made to it are
given to Bhangi faqirs, who are recruited from the Chuhrás. The
Balmíkís hold themselves aloof from other Chuhrá groups such as
the Bhalla or Dhankta, Ráwat, Halad, Daung, Dhának, Megh and
Heri, and do not marry with them. In marriage four gots are
avoided and the wedding is solemnised by a guru of their own
called a Meoța, but a Chháman or Jháman is also said to fulfil the
functions of a Brahman and conduct the seven pheras,
The Lálbegí thus appears to be identical with the Balmíkí, though
many accounts treat them as distinct.t In what they may differ
does not however appear. The Lálbegi certainly seems to be
* Other versions amplify the one in the text. According to one, Bálmík was carried to
the feast in a chariot of air by one of the Pandavas, though he was covered with leprosy :
P. N. Q. II, § 236. In another Bálmík protests to Arjan that he is a Hatiára and unworthy.
In one it is stated that overy grain of food eaten should have brought from Heaven &
sankh ki akásh báni or sankh dhuni, the sound of a conch, but when Bálmík devoured his
portion in 21 mouthfuls only 21 sounds were heard. In another Arjan is perturbed because
only 21 sounds are heard instead of 3.
† E.g. in Sirmúr the Bálmikís are said to worship Bálmík but not J.albeg. In this
State tho Bálmikís are said to marry on equal terms with the Mazbís,



The Lálbegis and Chuhļas.
superior to and distinct from the Dhának,* and followers of Balmík do
not eat food touched by a Dhának.
The Lálbegis of the Sársud got are said to be the original inhabitants
of Rewári, and besides Lálbeg they affect the Devi. Early marriage
is the rule and the wedding rites are performed by a Brahman, Never-
theless the Sársud, though they observe Hindu customs, bury their
dead, because, they say, their ancestors once worshipped the goddess
Bai.
The Hindu Chuhțás in Sirmúr appear to be mainly Bálmíkís. They are divided into the
following septs :-
Bhalla or Dhaukta, Rawat, Haled, Daung, Dhanak, Megh, Hari, Mazbi, Bálmíkí, of which
the latter are found in Náhan tahsil. Four gots are avoided in marriage. Weddings are
solemnised by their own gurús, who form a distinct, i.e., Phirka called Meora, resembling
the pádhás of the Hindus, but are said to tako food (kachchi roți and pakki) and water
from all Chuhrás. The Bálmíkís and Mazbís intermarry on equal terms. Bálmík and Gurú
Rám Rái are worshipped, but not Lálbeg. Bálmík has a makán (pakku or kachcha) in
front of which a ûre is lighted, and on this ghi is poured. Offerings made to it are given
to Bhangi faqirs who are taken from the ranks of the Chuhțás. The Bálmíkís do not marry,
cat or drink with the other groups, as they regard them as inferior. At weddings the
chhaman fulfills the functions of a Brahman, and conducts the 7 pheras. Girls, or súdhús
of their owa, are fed in lieu of Brahmans. If a Bhangi marry a woman of another caste he
is fined, but his children are regarded as legitimate. The dead are both burnt or buried, ac-
cording to the means of the family, burial being cheaper, Daughters may inherit in default
of sons, if their father bequeaths or gives his property to them. A wife can be divorced
but a pancháyat can award her maintenance. In Nában town each mohalla (and there are
seven) has its panch. A chaudhri is appointed by the State and be nominates the panch.
In Paonta tahsil the Chubțás do not intermarry with the Changars. They have their
own Brahmans who solemnise marriages. The latter do not drink water from the hands
of, or accept food from, the Ohubțás, but they may take átta and dál and cook it for them-
selves. Any man can enter the Chubệa caste. He is struck five times on the waist with a
broom in the name of Bálmík and made to pay a fine. Then the Cbuhrás eat with him and
he is free of the caste.
Funeral ceremonies.
They carry their dead on a bier. On a place midway between their hc use and the
burial ground they place the bier and offer pinda (é) or funeral cakes to the manes of the
dead. The bier is then carried to the burial ground where a grave is dug and the dead
body is laid in it with its face turned towards the Ganges. The grave is then filled up and
in the way everybody breaks a straw. Some say that this means that all connections with
the deceased are now broken up. On the third day all persons who carried ih: bier are
feasted. If the party be a rich man, the whole barádri is fed.
The Lálbegi may be regarded as a Hinduised Chubța, just as the Mazbi or Rangreta is a
Sikh convert, and the Musalli, Halálkhor or Kutána a Chuhțá convert to Islám.
The Chuhrás have Brubmans of their own, who do not, however, work as Chuhrás, but
live on the gifts and fees paid to them by their patrons. These Brahmuns do not eat
food cooked by Chubrás, or smoke with them (except in Káugra where, it is said, they do
smoke with Chubịás); though they do not avoid contact (chhút) with them like other
Brahmans. These Brahmans marry among themselves and burn their dead. Their yotru
is said to be Ratn Bhardwaji and they wear rosaries of rudraksh beads and the tíku on
their foreheads like regular Brahmars. Once a year the Brabman gurú celebrates a
thandúra or feast at which all the aweepers assequible and offer him giſts iu cash or kind.
Dibla.
* An account from Karnál ascribes the origin of the Dhánaks to a woman's incestuous
passion for her son. Bálmík declared the pair impure and named them Dhának. The
same account assigny 55 gots to the Chuhrás thus :
(Kalyáni.
Bagri.
Sultáni gots
Bignar.
Diának yols
Alkal.
( Sarasbál.
(Dágul.
( Chhapparbaud
Sáusi guts Punua.
( Parcha.
(Dádri.
Balmiki gots } Dumpra,
(Jhunjhat.
(Chauhan.
Lálbegi gots Kangre.
sách.



Lái Dási.
As the Chubfás have Brahmans of their own, so in Gargáon they boast their own Nále,
and in that District and in Gujrát they are said to have Mírásis of their own, who live
in Delhi, although one of the Ohuhra's own functions is to recite genealogies at their
patrons' weddings. These Mírásis received rations but not cooked food for their
services,
LÁL DÁsl.-A sect of Musalmáns who approach to Hinduism. It was founded
by Lál Dás, a Meo of Alwar, who though like all Meos a Musalmản
by faith, followed, again like all Meos, Hindu observances. He was
born about 1540 A.D., and the account of his life and teachings which
follows is taken from Powlett's Gazetteer of Alwar, pp. 53 et seq. The
devotees of the sect are called Sádhs. The worship consists largely
of repeating the name of Rám, and Sunday is their high-day. Yet
Lal Das was a Musalmán, is considered to be a Pír, and the greater
number of his followers, in the Mewát proper at least, are
Musalman Meos, though on the Punjab border, where the spread of
education has made the Meos better Muhammadans, the Lal Dasis are
usually Hindu Baniás and carpenters.
Lál Dás lived many years at Dhaoli Dhab, and used to wander over the hills behind
Alwar, and into the fort in search of sticks, by selling which he got his living. At length
he began to work miracles. An excited elephant stopped in full career and saluted bim,
and a Musalmano saiut, ene Chishti Gadan, of Tijára, found him standing in the air in
meditation. jit Musalmán conversed with Lál Dás, and discovering his piety and unworld-
liness, enjoined him to teach both Hindustand Musalmáns. After this Làl Dás went and
lived at Bandoli, 16 miles north-east oi Alwar, in the Rámgarh pargana. There ‘he laboured
for his own support and the good of others.' He lived on the top of a hill, and went through
great austerities in the hottest weather, was safe from snake and from tiger, and cured
the sick, Disciples of all castes collectec round him, and one, an oilman, received from him
miraculous power, which he used to expose an adulteress before an assembly. For this
Lál Dás reproved him, and eventually resumed his gift. Lál Dás prayed that he might
be relieved of all his false disciples, so persecution from a Mughal official began, and they
all fell away. It arose from Lál Dás' having caused the death of a Mughal who had laid
hands on another man's wife, and with his true followers he was carried to Bahadarpur, a few
miles off. The Muhammadan faujdár of Bahádarpur expressed surprise at his being followed
by both Hindus and Musalmáns, and asked him what he was. Lál Dás replied that the
question was a foolish one-what he was in truth he know not, but he got his garment, the
flesh, in a Meo's house. The fauidár demanded Rs. 5 apieze from the party as the price of
releasidg them, but they would pay nothing, ard then the faujdár gave them water from a
poisonous well, the only result of which was that the well became sweet, and was known
afterwards as the sugar well.' On another occasion Lál Dás was assaulted by Mughals,
and called to his protection angels, who slow 14 of them, but his followers, thinking that
anger was derogatory to Lál Dás, spread a report that they had killed the Mughals, and
that Lál Dás bad shown no anger. Lál Dás left Bandoli, and resided at the neighbouring
village of Todi, now in Gurgáon, on the Alwar border, where, being persecuted, he went
away. At Naroli the people refused him water, whereupon their wells dried up. At
Raggan, in Rámgarh, he was well received, and there he remained a while, “repeating God's
name, and teaching disciples the way.". Lál Dás, though at times he is said to have practised
the severest asceticism, had not led a life of celibacy. He had a daugbter, named Sarupa,
who could work miracles. One day he told that greatness and wonder-working even were
vanity, they, too, pass away like the wind, purity and gentleness alono were availing.
Those who possessed would attain to peace in heaven (Bar ke lok), and no more be subject
to birth and death. Lál Dás's son, Pahara, too, was 'a miracle.worker-blessings on him
and on Lál Dás's brothers, Sher Khan and Ghaus Khán. These all had hope in God
(Harji) alone, and in no other Doo. A voice in a mosque (? Harmandir), where Lál Dás
had gone, foretold the birth to him of a son, who was to be a polar star (Qutb), and would
succeed in the works of many births. Lál Dás received the announcement with one word,
“ Bhala !” A few months after, to try his faith, a daughter was born to him, who diel
directly. Lál Dás felt no grief, for God-worshippers (Harbhagtán) are always joyful,
Soon after God spoke to him again of the Qatb. Lál Dás manifested no hurry or anxiety,
A second daughter was born. Lál Vás said, “I have faith in God" (Sáin ko meri biswás).
At length a boy, after 18 months' pregnancy, was born. The child lived but 18 days, but
he spoke and reproached his mother for not showing him his father. Lál Dás was sent for,
and spoke to him, whereupon the child died satisfied. A faithful sádh washed and dressed
the corpse, and his sister Sarupa besought her father to commemorate him by a miracle. The
child's body was taken towards Bandoli (where, apparently, the infant daughters had been



Lalera-Lalli.
25
interred). A deep stream was in the way, but, as Sarupa walked forward, a dry path
appeared, and the little corpse was carried to Bandoli, where a dargáh was established,
which has still a great reputation. It was reported to Sahib Hukm, Mughal governor of
Tijára, that Lál Dás did not pray as a Musalmán, nor perform ablutions, nor call on the
prophet, but that he taught Hindus and Musalmáns the same doctrine. The hákiin sent for
Lál Dás, who received the messengers kindly, and accompanied them with 12 disciples
who refused to leave him. A vicious horso which he had to ride became quiet in hi.
hands, and a fawn which one of the Musalmáns killed, and compelled Lál Dás to carry,
came to life. The Tijára nákiin treated Lál Dás kindly.. But he offered him meat, saying
that it was Musalmán food, and that he who was a Musalmán and ate as such was in the
path of God. Lál Dás replied, “Love God. God is one and separate from all. There i:
one path for Hindu and Turk, by which they come and go. Whoever kills another cuts his
own throat, for the murdered is avenged by God's casting tho murderer into hell. Let me
be shown how to escape before the judgment.seat, where God himself will do justice.
The good keep in mind the fear of that day." Lál Dás then took the food into his hand,
and the meat turned to fine rice. Lá! Dás and his 12 followers were then confined under a
guard for the night, but without severity. They all vanished, and the guard was imprisoned
for letting them go, on which they all appeared again in the jail. Sálib Hukm, the hikim,
had a beloved daughter who was tormented by a witch. add the nacromancers (júduyírs)
could do notbing to relieve her, and Qázís and Maulavís could not exercise the evil spirit,
Her mother appealed to Lál Dás, and he went to the girl who inmediately began to kiss his
feet, and the demon (jin) having left the girl, appeared before Lál Dás and declared his
submission. In Maujpur (Lachmangarh paryana) was a holy man, Mansukha by name, and
a Malli by caste, who loved God with a true love (sachli prít), and gave much in alms.
He believed in Lál Dás, but his wife disparaged him because he worked no miracles and
because he could not avoid being carried off to Tijára. Mansukba said that Lál Dás knew
the thoughts of men. On his going shortly after to pay his respects, Lál Dás received
him badly on account of his unbelieving wife. Mansukha was going sorrowfully away.
Lal Dás, however, forgave him, and called hiin back and comforted him, just as a mother
takes into her arms and consoles a child whom she has corrected.
An Agra merchant was shipwrecked. He asked for advice. Some said one thing, some
another, but he remembered Lál Dás and called or him, promising him a tithe if his goods
were saved. Lál Dás heard the prayer of the distant merchant, and showed enotion. The
goods were saved. However, Lál Dás refused his thank-offering, as he liad no need of
wealth, but told him to give it to Vishnu súdìvs.
A Káyath of Agra, of great wealth and of high position, was alllicted by leprosy or some
foul skin disease, which made life a burden to him. Hearing of Lál Dás's goodness to the
shipwrecked merchant, ho went to him at the full moon, Lál Dás's chief day of reception.
The saint told the Káyath to give all his goods in charity and abandon the world. In
token of his having forsaken all pride and wordliness, he was to blacken bis face, mount a
donkey, and hang a gourd on his back. He obeyed, and on his subsequently bathing at the
junction of the rivers at Allahabad, his Lody becamo as pure as gold.
· Various other miracles of the same type are related in the account of Lál Dás, who
prevents an eclipse of the sun, predicts the famine of S. 1884, feeds Nágá Cháran Dás of
Mathura, who comes to him with 700 followers. The Meos having carried off his buffaloes,
Lál Dás prophesied that the Mewat should belong to the Kach wáhas and their chief Jai
Singh. Before his death, lál Das having niet with ono Thákuria of Chapra, who maint-
tained himself and fed others out of the proceeds of his own labour, and was blessed by
God with the necessary virtues, wished to appoint him his successor, but Thákuria declined
the honour as being unworthy of it, and Lál Dás gave him the choice of burial alive or
acceptance of authority. Thákuria chose the former.
LALERA, a Muhammadan Ját clán (agricultural) found in Montgomery and
Multán.
Lalí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
LÁLí, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
LaLiána, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
Lallhí, a class of Muhammadan faqirs who dance when they go to begin
houses.
LALLÍ, a tribe of Játs, found in Montgomery, where they are Muhammadan
and classed as agricultural, and in Gurdáspur, where they are one of
the main Ját gots of the Shakargarh tahsil and hold a parewa at Gorála



Lálok-Lámá.
in October. This is a special festival of the Lallís, who collect consider-
able sums which are distributed in prizes to wrestlers, etc., and is held
in honour of a deceased ancestor of the tribe. But a pareui fair is also
held at Goralla in Sialkot.
Lálok-pass-crosser,' in Lábul: see under Káng.chumpo.
LALOTA, a sept of Rájputs, found in Hoshiarpur.
LALOTRA, a -sept of Rájputs found in Siálkoţ and probably the same as the
Lalota. They are said to intermàrry with the Bajju Rájpuis.
Lámá, the priest of the Buddhists in Láhul, Spiti and Kanaur. The word
is apparently a corruption of Brahman, the Tibetan form being bláma.
One of the inost peculiar features of the lamaic system is the
hierarchy from which it takes its name. The teaching of Buddha
included an elaborate monastic system, but no priests, for there was no
god to worship or ceremonies to perform, and no hierarchy, for all inen
were equal. And till about A. D. 1400 the lámás or monks of Tibet
recognised no supreme head of the faith. But about that time the
abbot of the Gahldán monastery near Lhása proclaimed himself the
patriarch of the whole lawalc priesthood, and his successor, of the
Tashi monastery, declared the grand lániás to be the perpetual re-
incarnations of one of the Bodhisatvas or semi-Buddhas, who, as each
alámá died, was born again in the person of an infant that might be
known by the possession of certain divine marks. The fifth in suc.
cession founded the hierarchy of Dalai lámás at Lbása in 1640, and
made himself master of the whole of Tibet. He assumed the title of
Dalai Lámá, while the lámú of Tashi still continued to enjoy his former
privileges, and thus we now have two great chairs filled by a double
series of incarnations. There is also a third great lámá in Bhutan,
known among the Bhutanis as the Dharma Rájá, but among the
Tibetans as Lord of the World. Below these three great lámás come
the ordinary monks, who live for the most part in monasteries ruled
by abbots whose only claim to precedence one over another is derived
from the importance of the institution over which they preside, or
from the influence of personal sauctity. They are, with the exception
of the Drukhpa sect, bound to celibacy, at least while leading a
monastic life, and are collectively called gedun, or clergy. They
consist of lámás or full monks (for the word means nothing more),
and novices or neophytes. There are also convents for nuns, which
are very numerous. The lámás are distinguished by rosaries of 108
beads, which they wear as necklaces.
Primogeniture obtains among the landholders of Spiti, the eldest son
succeeding to the land as soon as he is of full age, and the father
being pensioned off. The younger sons, as they grow up, retire to the
ancestral cell in the monastery, where they support themselves by such
industries as can be pursued within the walls of the building, and by
alms and fees, often supplemented by an all wance from the eldest son,
If the latter die without leaving a son, the eldest of surviving brothers
who cares to do so abandons the monastic life, resumes the property,
and becomes the husband of the widow without further ceremony.
The Tibetan lámás are divided into three chief sects of which the most
Encient are the NINGMAPA or Nyimapa, whose followers wear red
clothes, and to which most of the lumás of Ladakh belong. The DRAQPA



Lámaism in Spiti.
27
or Drukhpa sect also wear red garments, and are ruled over by the
Dharma Rájá or great lämá of Bhutan, in which country they are most
numerous. It would appear that the Spiti lámás belong partly and
the Lábul lámás almost entirely to this sect, which permits its inonks
to marry. The GELUKPA sect was founded about A. D. 1400 by the
first great lámá of Gáhldán, and its followers are distinguished by
yellow garments, the sect prevails chiefly in Tibet, and both the
Dalai and the Tashi lámás belong to it.
In Spiti the younger sons of a landowner, the younger brothers of a
KUANG-COHEN-PA, are sent in childhood to Buddhist monasteries in which
they spend their lives, unless, in the event of the Khang-chhen-pa
failing to beget issue, one of them elects to abandon the monastio
life and take his eldest brother's place in the family. It is only
rarely that the son of a dútal-pa, or cotiager, becomes a monk.
It is also open to the eldest son to enter a monastery, in which
case his next brother will marry and inherit the fathers' land. Some-
times however, the son of a dútal-pa does become a monk. The
profession is thus confined as a rule to the younger sons of the regular
Jandholders, who take to it of necessity, but get as maintenance the
produce of a field set aside an táo or, da-zhing (from dawa, à synonym
for láma)? It is, however, only the second son who is entitled to claim
da.zhing, and many do not take it from their elder brothers, but have
all in common with him, including their income from begging, funeral
fees, etc.* This is to ihe advantage of the elder brother, as a celibato
monk's expenses are of course very small. When there are more than two
bro:hers, the younger ones, though they cannot get da-zhing, are consider-
ed entitled to some subsistence allowance from the head of the family, but
in return they do certain kinds of work for him in the summer, during
which season only the elder monks remain in the monasteries. For
the instance, as long as they are tsun-pa or ge-tsul, that is, neophytes
or deacons, and not gelong, or fully ordained monks or priests, they
will carry loads and do all field work except ploughing : when gelong
they will cook, feed cattle and sheep, and do other domestic services,
but not carry loads or cut grass or wood. But once a monk always to
monk'is not the law in Spiti. Supposing the head of a family to die
and leave a young widow, with no son or a son of tender age only, then
the younger brother, if there is one, almost always elects to leave the
monastery, and thereupon he is at once considered his brother's
widow's husband. She cannot object, nor is any marriage ceremony
necessary.t If there was a son by the elder brother, he of course suc-
ceeds when of full age, and his mother and uncle retire to the small
house, and the other sons, if any, go into the monasteries in the usual
way. So, again, if the head of the family has only daughters, and,
having given up hope of getting a son, wishes to marry one of his
daughters and take her husband into the house as his son and heir,
ughing inestie aways. lice
* Nevertheless ia most holdings a plot of from one to half a khal will be found in the
occupation of the láma brother or uncle of the head of the family. It is ploughel and sowa
by the latter, but the láma provides the seed and gets the whole produce. The da-zhing
reverts of course to the head of the family on the death of the láma.
+ The eldest son, or if he has a call to become a monk, the next son, who has not turned
láma, alone gocs through the marriage ceremony wiih the bride. The chief rite at the
wedding appears to consist in making a cake or názar, (lit. 'picture ') of satu or flour which
is worshipped and then thrown away, outside the hamlet to avert evils.



28
Láma orders in Spits.
it generally happens that the younger brother in the monastery objects,
and says he will leave the priesthood and beget à son. In such cases
his right to do so is generally allowed : sometimes he will marry a wife
to himself, and put his elder brother in the small house, sometimes, by
agreement, he will cohabit with his sister-in-law in hope of getting a
son by her A monk who throws off the frock in this way has to pay a
fine to his monastery. Many decline to become laymen : Sir James
Lyall believed that this was a rule in the case of those w bo have attain.
ed to the grade of gelong. Where the láma brother declines, then it is
agreed that, in the lower part of the valley (i.e. Kothis Pin and Sham),
the father or widow-mother can take a son-in-law to live in the house
and succeed as son and heir, and no kinsmen (if there are any) oan
object.
In Spiti the monks of Pin are of the Drukhpa, and not of the Gelakpa
or celibate class to which those of the other four monasteries, Ki,
Dankhar or Láwopi, Tabo and Tang-gyut, belong. They marry in
imitation of their patron saint Guru Rimbochi, though in their books
marriage is not approved of: this saint founded several orders, of which
that to which the monks of Pín belong is the most ancient, and is
called Ngyangma. The wives and families of the monks live' not in
the monasteries, but in small houses in the villages. Every son of a
lámu or monk becomes a buzhan, which is the name given to a low
order of strolling monks or friars. There are nineteen families of
these buzhans in Pín Kothi, Sometimes the younger son of a land.
holder becomes a buzhan in preference to going into the monastery.
These buzhans are a very curious set of people, they get a living by
wandering in small parties through all the neighbouring countries,
stopping at every village, and acting plays, chanting legends, and
dancing like whirling dervishes, many also trade in a small way by
bartering grain for salt with the Tibetans, and then exchanging the
salt with the Kanaur people for iron, buck-wheat, or honey, they also
often undertake to carry loads for travellers across the passes, as
substitutes for the landholders. They dress much like other monks,
but, instead of shaving their heads, wear their hair in long straight
twists, which gives them a very wild appearance. According to the
story told to Sir James Lyall in Spiti the buzhan order was found by
one Thang-thong Giálpo (lit. 'king of the desert) under the following
circumstances :-A certain king of Lhása perverted the people of Tibet
from Buddhism to a new religion of his own. He succeeded so well
that in the course of fifty years the old faith was quite forgotten, and
the Om máni padme hun, or sacred ejaculation, quite disused. To win
back the people, Tsan-rezig, the divinity worshipped at Triloknáth,
caused an incarnatior. of himself to be born in a king's house in the
person of Thang-thong Giálpo; the child grew up a saint and a
reformer, he saw that it was impossible to reclaim the people by books,
and he therefore adopted the dress since worn by the buzhans, and
spent his life in wandering from village to village, offering to amuse
the people by acting miracle-plays on condition of their repeating
after him the chorus Om máni pádme hom whenever it occurred in the
chants or recitation. In this way the people became again accustomed
to repeat the sacred sentence, “their mouths became purified," and



Láma death customs.
the religion of Buddha revived. There is something rather impres-
sive about the performances of these buzhans.
The lámas of the various sects in Spiti have next to nothing to do
with the burial or burning of the dead, since those functions are in the
hands of a certain class of people called joba (pronounced joa). This
class is however unknown in Upper Kanaur, Láhul and Ladákb, As
Spiti is a woodless country burcing is seldom resorted to, except in
the case of a prominent láma who has departed this life and as such
must be burnt. The dead are also huried, sometimes in fields or
near them. in places which belong to the family, and sometimes under
rocks : while strangers, poor people and more especially children, even
those of the well-to-do, are thrown into the streams. A fourth custom,
very common in Spiti, but unknown in Phu and its neighbourhood,
is the rending of the corpse in pieces, which afford a welcome meal to
fish and to the Lammergeiers which are called jajin or jazas.
A láma especially a Great Láma, must always be careful when on
his death-bed to depart from this world in the posture of a sitting
Buddha. If he quits it without assuming that seated attitude his learn.
ing counts for nothing and his fame is lost for ever. Three such atti-
tudes are distinguished, (1) the usual one in which the dying man
cannot see his feet, (2) that in which the soles of the feet appear to be
turned upwards, and (3) the peculiarly artificial dzogspe skyiltrung.
The more artistic the posture of a Great Láma at his demise and the
longer his corpse preserves it, the higher rises his reputation and the
respect in which he is held by all the people. As soon as his body
begins to lean to one side it can be carried out and burnt at the spot
where the chhodrten or grave-stone has already been set up.
All corpses are said to be tightly bound before burial in the tracts
under Buddhist influence,
The rigid tying up of the body is due to a fear of tue rolangs or re.
surrection of the body in which a spirit or kobbold enters into the
corpse. The vetálas or corpses temporarily animated by kobbolds, ac-
cording to the popular belief, share the tendency of dead bodies to be
come stiff and so cannot stoop. Owing to this belief at Lhása low
doors are preferred for houses in the neighbourhood of burial places.
Moreover manifestations of rolangs now occur generally all the more
that the universal degeneracy of mankind has so increased in compari-
son with former times, that the demons find ample opportunities to
enter into living bodies and men's virtues are rarely great enough to
enable them to withstand their entry.
The lâmas in Láhul are generally of the Kanet caste, though there
are, of course, cases where even Thákurs have become lámas. The
Kanet cuts his choti as does & Gosain, and becomes the disciple of
soaie láma, and this may be even after marriage. The lámas of
Láhul who all belong to the Drugpå order may marry. Their song
belong to their father's original caste. Lánas sometimes cease to
belong to the priesthood, allow their chotis to grow, and are again
received as Kanets. Women also become nuns and live in the
monasteries, where the morality is far from pure. It is common for



Lăng-Langân.
casos of seduction to occur, and then the abbot imposes a fine
(dharmdand chostim) in the shape of a feast to the fraternity. It is
still common for both Brahmans and lamas to be present at marriages
and funerais, a fact which shows how intimately Hinduism and
Buddhism are connected in Láhul.
As a matter of fact, many of the Drugpa lamas are married,
possess houses and fields, and only live part of the winter in the
monasteries. Almost every house contains a small family chapel, in
which Sangyas is the principal image. It is furnished also with a
few books, and daily offerings of the kind already described are
made.
LÁNG, a Ját (agricultural) clan, found in a solid block in the centre of the
Shujábád tahsil, Muitán district, on the old banks of the Beas, where
they settled in Akbar's time. They are also found in Babáwalpur
where they claim to be one of the four septs of the Polandars, the other
three being the Dalle, Lile and Kanjur. They say they came from a
far country with Sher Shah Sayyid Jalál.
LANGAH, a tribe, classed as Ját in Dera G bázi Khán, where it is probably
aboriginal, or immigrant from the eastward. ::
Langán, a tribe of agriculturists in the Moltán, Muzaffargarh, Shahpur,
Montgomery and Dera Gházi Khán districts. They claim to have
been originally an Afghán tribe who came to Multán from Sivi and
Dhádhar for purposes of trade, and eventually settled at Rappri and
the neighbourhood. In the confusion that followed the invasion of
Tamerlane Multán became independeut of the throne of Delhi, and the
inhabitants chese Shaikh Yusuf Kureshi, head of the shrine of Shaikh
Baha-ud-Din, as governor. In 1445 A.D., Rai Sahra, chief of the
Langáhs, whose daughter had been married to Shaikh Yúsuf, intro-
duced an armed band of his tribesmen into the city by night, seized
Shaikh Yusuf and sent him to Delhi, and proclaimed himself king
with the title Sultán Qutb-ud-Din. The kings of Multán belonging to
the Langáh tribe are shown below:-
Sultán Qutb-ud-Din ...
... 1445 to 1460.
Sultán Husain .... . ... .. ... 1460 (extent of reign not known).
Sultán Firoz Sháh?
Sultán Mahmúd } .
... ...
Dates not known.
Sultán Husain ... ... ... ... ... 1518 to 1526.
The dynasty terminated with the capture of Maltán, after a siege
of more than a year, by Shah Hasan Arghun, governor of Sindh, in
1526. For ten days the city was given up to plunder and massacre,
and most of the Langáhs were slain, Sultán Husain was made prisoner
and died shortly after. The Langáh dynasty ruled Moltán for 80 years,
during which time Biloches succeeded in establishing themselves along
the Indus from Sítpur to Kot Karor. The Langáhs of Multan and
Muzaffargarh are now very insignificant cultivators.
Farishtah is the authority for their Afgháo origin, which is doubtful
to say the least. Pírzáda Murád Bakhsh Bhutta of Multán says that
the Bhutta, Langáh, Kharral, Harral and Lak are all. Punwar Rájputs
by origin. But the Langáh are described by Tod as a clan of the
Chalúk or Soláni tribe of Agnikula Rájputs, who inhabited Multán
s governs had been marre the city by nig celf king



Langáh-Laspál.
and Jaisalmer and were driven out of the latter by the Bhatti at least
700 years ago. It is also stated by mirásis that the Langáh, Bhutta,
Dahar, Shajrá and Naich of Multán all sprang from the 5 sons of one
Malhj in the couplet:
Sagli jihándi dádi, Sodi jihándi má,
Mahli jai panjputr-Dahr, Bnutta, Langáh, Naich, Shajrá.
Some of the Langá hs now claim Arabian descent and say that their
founder came from Arabia 600 years ago. The Langáhs are all
content to be styled Játs, but in Multán some of them are called
Langáh Sultáni. The Punjab Langáh are mainly confined to the
lower Indus and Chenáb, those in Multán occupying a more or less
solid block in Shujábád tahsil.
Langáo, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgoinery.
LaŅGÁNAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
LANGRAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
LANGRIÁL, a tribe (agricultural) classed as Rájput which inhabits the whole
of the eastern bár in Multán. Comparatively recent immigrants, their
mirási claims for them descent froin a Brahman of Bikáner,* but
they themselves say they are Quraish from Arabia, and that they
held sway for some time at Thatha in Sindh under one Ghiás-ud-Din
who from the lavishness of his public kitchen (langar) obtained the
title of Langriál. Ghiás-ud-Din is said to have been a contemporary
of Muhammad of Ghor and to have gone with him to Delhi. There it
is described as wandering vių Kashmir to Shahpur and thence to
Gariála in Jhang. From there they went to the Kamália ilága in
Montgomery, but migrated in Shujá Khán's time to Kamánd in the
country formerly held by the Háns. By nature nomads and by babit
cattle-lifters, the Langriál are by degrees settling down to more stablo
and reputable means of living.
LAPEJA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
LÁR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán. They originally came from
Sindh and affect the title of Jám.
Lasai, a tribe of Játs
LABANPál, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
LASHÁRI, LISBÁRI, one of the original main sections of the BALOCH, said to
have settled in Gaudáva after the war with the Rinds, and to be now
represented by the Magbassis of Jhal in Kachhi, where some of them
forin the largest Maghassi clan. Lasháris are found wherever
Baloch settled in the Punjab. The Jistkánis are of Lashári descent,
and there is a strong sub-tuman of Lasháris in the Gurcháni tribe but
those of Drigri in Dera Gházi Khán appear to be Játs. In the
Gugera and Pakpattan tahsils of Montgomery most of the Baloch are
Lasháris. In Sháhpur the Lashári tribe is classed as agricultural.
Laspát, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
# They also say that their ancestor was a Bráhman Cháran from Bíkáner who was con.
verted by Sultán Samrán. They originally settled in Ráwalpindi ; thence they moved to
Jhang, and took some country from the Siál.
In Fialkot they claim descent through Rai Daram from Langriál. Jasu 15 in descent from
the latter turned Moslem. They settled in Sialkot in the time of Sháh Jabán.
Page 31 -
LAR.-The Lars in Baláwalpur have several septs :-
i. Wagejas.
ix. Shaikh.
ii. Saníja, in the Feroza ilúga. X. Gandia.
iii. Rameja, iv Feroza itself.
:xi. Batta.
iv. Maráli-Dhan, in the Jajja xii, Lutfia.
and Naushabra ilugas.
Ballha.
v. Alúria.
xiv. Dammar,
vi. Darúrhi.
XV. Bhela.
vii. Sub-Rája.
xvi. Kásar.
viii. Jharga.
xiij.
.



32
eganised tuman het Gurcháni nortback han, which
Lat-Lhápt.
LAT, & Ját clan found in Ludhiana. Its members do not cut the jandi tree
at weddings, but playing with twigs is observed on the site of their
jathera and the kangna game is also played.
LÁTHAR, a Ját got or tribe which claims descent from an ancestor who
migrated from Jaisalmer and married a Ját widow. He was once
attacked and surrounded by enemies whom he put to flight but one of
them, whom he had captured, killed bim by thrusting a láthi or stick
into his mouth, whence the name of the got. It holds seves villages
in Jínd tahsil. Khera Bhúmia is worshipped at weddings.
LATHER, a Ját tribe fouod in Karnál whither it migrated from Karsaula in
Jínd, a village held by Láthars. Doubtless = Láthar.
LATI, an agricultural clan found in Shabpur.
Lau, an Aráiņ clan agricultural found in Montgomery.
LAUR, a tribe of Játs. They trace their origin to Lalhora, a place of
uncertain locality. They are found in the Báwal nizámat of Nábha.
LÁWas, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Láwí, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
LEGHÁRI, an important organised tuman of the Baloch, occupying the
country from the Kúra pass, which is the Gurcháni northern border, to
the Sakhi Sarwar pass a little to the north of Dera Gbázi Khán, which
divides them from the Khoid. They are of pare Rind origin* and are
divided into 11 clans, the Haddiáni (a sub-tuman), Böghláni, Jogiáni,
Ramdani,; Hijbáni, Talbur, Chandia, Kaloi, Ahmadani, Buloáni, Bat-
wáni and Haibatáni, of which the first inhabit the hills beyond our
border and are not subject to our rule, and are, or were in 1860, norca-
dic and inveterate thieves. The chief belongs to the Aliáni clan. Their
headquarters are at Choti Zerín, where they are said to have settled
after their return from accompanying Humáyún, expelling the Ah-
madáni who then held the present Leghári country. They are also
found in considerable numbers in Dera Ismail and Muzaffargarh ; but
these outlying settlements own no allegiance to the tribe. The Tálbúr
dynasty of Sindh belonged to this tribe and there is still a considerable
Leghári colony in that Province. It appears probable that the repre-
sentatives of several of the Northern Baloch tribes, which are now
found in Sindh, are descended from people who went there during the
Tálbár rale.
LEABAR, cf. Baláhar.
LEKHO, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
LEL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar, Multán and Montgomery.
In the latter Districts it is Muhammadan.
LELÍ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Lhápá, one who represents the lhá or god and is inspired to give oracles
in bis name in Kanaur. The rite is thus described by the Reveread
R. Schnabel of the Moravian Mission at Phu :-
"A small fire is lighted on the ground and a goat's skin spread in ·
front of it.
* But the Chandia clan is separate, and the Kaloi and Haliáni are said to be Bozdár.



Libanah
Lilári.
33
After the music of the drums has begun a man (the lhápá) comes
out of the circle of the spectators and stands with bare feet on
the skin. Another places himself opposite him and, taking a few burn-
ing coals, holds them close under his nose. The man thus inhales the
smoke and bis breathing becomes laboured, insensibility supervening.
His eyes begin to roll, a sign to the audience that the lhá is entering
into the man. Suddenly he bisses like a snake, and throws off his
clothing with a jerk. The spectators spriug quickly upon him and
wrap his head in a white, but dirty, cloth and give hiin as a sceptre a
stick wrapped with red rags. The other wan now offers murmured
prayers to the lhá, while the other, the lhápå who represents the lhá
turns to the village notables and addresses them with an affected
voice, in nasal, half singing tones. He complains that on a former oc-
casion they only sacrificed a thin he-goat, aud declares that unless
he gets a fat one on this occasion, he will not bless tbe spot. No one
will furnish such a goat. A heated debate follows. Every one pre-
tends that his be-goat is thinner than his neighbour's. Meanwhile
the lhá has withdrawn, but the man representing him smokes content-
edly and puffs at bis hubble-bubble in perfect peace. At last the re-
quired he-goat is obtained and as the lhá is re-called he announces
that he has seen the good will of the villagers and will bless them with-
out the expense of a sacrifice, apparently because he finds that his
friends will have to provide the goat and wishes to spare him that
sacrifice. Oil cakes are now offered to the lhá but he does not eat
them. Instead of so doing he casts them away in all directions with
many ceremonies. He does the same with a small pot of chang or
beer. This completes the act of blessing, but peace and decorum are
not yet restored. On the contrary a veritable pandemonium, to wbich
the drums contribute, epsues, while the young men in ecstasy rave and
frolic round the lhá. One can imagine how the man into whom the lhá
descends under the pretence that the Láma's voice speaks through
him can blacken the character of his enemies, and he often does so.
Usually his remarks only bring him blows, which are given to the lhá-
not to him.
LIBÁNAH, the form of LABÁNA current in Sialkoç.
LIKRÁRí, fem. -AN, &-writer and Likhwayyá, a penman: cf. Lakhari and
Lakhwayya.
LILÁRí, fem. -ÁN, also nilár a dyer, from líl or nél, indigo. The Lilári is
hardly distinguishable from the Rangrez. They are both dyers, and
both artisans and not menials, being chiefly found in the towns. But
the distinction is said to be that the Lilári dyes, as his name implies, in
indigo only ; while the Rangrez dyes in all country colours except indi.
go and madder, which last appertains to the Chhimba. It is noticeable
that, with the exception of a few returned as Hindus by the Native
States, both of these castes are exclusively Musalmán. The Hindu in-
deed would not dye in blue, which is to him an abomination; and
mnadder-red is his special colour, which perhaps accounts for the
Chhímbas, most of whom are Hindu, dyeing in that colour only. In
Pesháwar the Dhobi and Rangrez are saiả to be identical. The Lilári
is often called Nílári, Níráli or Nílgar, Lolárí or Lálári. In Multán,
Pungar is the term locally used for Lilárí.



84
Lilla.
LILLAS.A small tribe of Ját status which holds a block of about 40 square
miles at the foot of the hills, in the Thal, west of Pind Dadan Khan,
in Jhelum. It is also found in Shahpur.
They, and their Mírásís, say that they were originally located in
Arabia, being relations of the Prophet on his mother's side, and there-
fore Quraish; in the time of Sultan Mahmúd of Ghazni one of the tribe,
named Háras, migrated to India, with 160 kinsmen as well as depend.
ants, and settled at Masnad in Hindustán, 27 generations ago. Ap-
parently after some 7 generations their forefathers went to Multán,
where a well-known Pír gave them one Ghauns Sháh as a spiritual
gnide, warning them that dissension would lead to their ruin : taking
Ğhauns Shah with them, they went to Shahídgarh, or Shahídánwali,
also known as Lilgarh (said to still exist on the Chepáb in Gujranwala),
and there encamped. The local governor when ordered to expel
them succeeded in dividing the tribe into two factions, which fought
a pitched battle. The defeated party dispersed and its descendants
are now found near the Chenáb, while the other, weakened by the
struggle, migrated to its present seats, headed by Lilla Buzurg, 20
generations ago. This tract was then occupied by a tribe of Hál Játs,
said to be found nowhere else, while the local governor was an Avand
Khatri of Bhera. Tbe Háls were exterminated, but a pregnant woman
escaped, and from her son the few families of Háls, who still hold land
in Lilla are said to be descended. Extensive mounds to the west of
Lilla* unark the site of the Hál village.
The Lillás are Sunni Musalmáns, and say that they were so long
before their immigration to India : they deny that they have ever had
any connection with Brahmans as parohits, etc., and certainly have
none now. They have no special Pír, but say that their spiritual
leader is the successor of the Pír of Multán, who gave them Ghauns
Sbáh, though the connection has lapsed with time. But they still go
occasionally to do reverence at the shrine of Baháwal Haq at Multán.
Their birth, marriage and death customs resemble those of the Muham.
madans generally, but in barying the dead they place the headstone
at the head of the grave for a male and at the feet in the case of a
female. For some unknown reason, they never wear blue pagris. '
Agriculture is said to have been their original occupation, as now.
They say they marry only in their own tribe, or (on equal terms)
with Phaphras, Gondals, and Jetbals : but are believed to marry with
any tribe that is considered zamindár, or Ját, the two words meaning
mich the same. Widow remarriage is permitted and a widow usually
marries her deceased husband's brother : she cannot pow be forced to
do so. but, they say, this was the practice before British rule.
Lillás eat and drink with Mírásís, but draw the line at Musallís.
Phoverbially turbulent and factious, they produce a rather large number
of bad characters. A local sayiug charges them with selling their
daughters in marriage, and then getting them back to sell once more.
Physically they are well developed, and seem to resemble their Awan
Lilla comprises 4 large villages, Lilla Bhera or Mainowána, Lilla Bharwána, Lilla
dindana and Lilla Guj, all named after their founds, Maino, Bharo, Hindo and Guj.



Lillári-Lo-dukpit.
neighbours: but they have not taken much to service in the army.
They are industrious cultivators.
LILLÁRI, see under Lilári.
Lidhári, a Balcch clan (agricnltural) found in Montgomery: see Lashári.
LOBána, see under LABÁNA.
LOBON, see under Chházang.
Lodná, Lodhi, Lodhke, Lodh, Loda or Lod, like the Kácani, a well-known
cultivating caste of Hindustán, found in the Punjab chiefly in the
Jumna Districts, though a few of them havo moved on westwards to
the great cantonments. Almost without exception Hindus the Lodhás
are said to be distinct from the Lodhi outcasts of Central India ; but
the Lodhas of Delhi would appear to be of very low social standing.
It is indeed said that there are two distinct castes, the Lodha and
Lodhá. In Ambála the Lodhás cultivate hemp largely and work it up
into rope.
LODBARÁ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
LODHRÁN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Lovi, a tribe of Pathans to which belong many of the septs of fighting
PAWINDAHS. They belong to the Mati branch of the Pathans and
are descended from Ibráhím, tb3 Lodai,' the greatest or superior.'
Ibráhím's son Siánai had two sons, one of whom Prangai had a son
named KHASSUR, and the Lodis are thus akin to the Pſángi, Súr and
Sarwáni tribes, as well as many others; see under Ghilzai. The Prangi
and Súr were expelled from the country round Tánk by the Luhani
or Nuháni (themselves a Lodi tribe) about the end of the 16th century.
They are now found in very small numbers in Peshawar and in
scattered communities in the Punjab, e.g., iri Amritsar, where they
are classed as agricultural, and Ambála.
LODIEE.--Regarded as a clan of the Kharrals in Montgomery, in Gujranwala,
where they hold 36 villages, they are said to be of Solar Rájput descent,
and to have come from the Rávi, the Kharral head-quarters, to the
Gujranwala bár some 10 generations ago, and led a pastoral and
marauding life much frequenting the country near the Sangla Hill, till
reverses at the hands of the Virk Játs forced them to settle down and
take to agriculture in early Sikh times, cultivating land in Hinjrá and
Jag villages.* They do not give daughters to the local Ját tribes, but
will take wives from any Ját community. Pagvand is the rule of
inheritance, and adoption is very common. Lodi their eponym, had
four sons who founded as many muhins or septs, but of these only two
are now in existence.
LODRAH, a tribe of Játs, which claims to be descended from Lodrah,
son of Sukhrám Deo Manhás, and thus of Solar Rajput origin. It
was converted to Islám under Aurangzeb and is settled in tahsil
Sialkot : cf. Lodbara.
LO-DUKPA, see Dukpa.
* Gujranwala Sett, Rep., 1866-7, p. 6.



36
Lohán-Lohár.
LOHÁN, a tribe of Játs, descended from an eponym, of Punwar Rájput origin,
belonging to Vikramajít's family, and found in Siálkot. The Lohán
or Lohain are also found in Hissár, where it is said that one of the four
sons of Loban was Chula, a bhagat who founded Narnaund, and is
now worshipped as the tribal god under the form of an oblong
stone in his shrine there. His Brahmans are of the Indauria got and
are fed on the 11th sudi of each month.
Lohár, fem. -1, -AN.-The Lohár of the Punjab is, as his name implies, A
blacksmith pure and simple. He is one of the true village menials,
receiving customary dues in the shape of a share of the produce, in
return for which he makes and mends all the iron implements of
agriculture, the material being found by the busbandman. He is
most numerous in proportion to total population in the hills and
the Districts that lie immediately below them, where like all other
artisan castes ho is largely employed in field labour. He is prosent
in singularly small numbers in the Multán division, the Deraját and
Baháwalpur; probably because men of other castes engage in black-
smith's work in those parts, or perhaps because the carpenter and
the blacksmith are the same. His social position is low, oven for a
menial ; and he is classed as an impure caste in so far that Játs
and others of similar standing will have no social communion with
him, though not as an outcast like the scavenger. His impurity, like
that of the barber, washerman, and dyer, springs solely from the
nature of his employment ; perhaps because it is a dirty one, but more
probably because black is a colour of evil omen, though on the other
hand iron has powerful virtue as a charm against the evil eye. It is
not impossible that the nocessity under which he labours of using
bellows made of cowhide may have something to do with his ima
purity*, Be appears to follow very generally the religion of the
neighbourhood, and some 34 per cent. of the Lohárs are Hindu,
about 8 per cent. Sikh, and 58 per cent. Musalmán. Most of the
iron-workers in the Punjab are called Lohárs, though Ahangar,
the Persian for blacksmith, Nálband or farrier and Koftgar are
also ased as translations of the term lohár or to denote special
branches of his calling. In Peshawar the ironsmith is called taudi
karigar as distinguished from the sari kárigar or carpenter. In
the north of Sirsa, and probably in the Central States of the
Eastern Plains, the Lohár or blacksmith and the Kháti or carpenter
are undistinguishable, the same men doing both kinds of work; and in
many, perhaps in most parts of the Punjab, the two intermarry. In
Hoshiarpur they are said to forin a single caste called Lohár-Tarkhan,
and the son of a blacksmith will often take to carpentry and vice versa ;
tut it appears that the castes were originally separate, for the joint
caste is still divided into two sections who will not intermarry or even
eat or smoke together, the Dhamán, from dhamna ' to blow,' and the
Khatti from khat,' wood.' In Gujránwála the same two sections exist ;
and they are the two great Tarkhán tribes also. In Karnál a sort
of connection seems to be admitted, bat the vastes are now distinct.
In Sirsa the Lobárs may be divided into three main sections; the
* Colebrooke says that the Karmakára of blacksmith is classed in the Puráns as one of
the polluted tribes.



Lohár.
first, men of undoubted and recent Ját and even Rájpat origin who
have, generally by reason of poverty, taken to work as blacksmiths ;
secondly the Suthár Lohár or members of the Suthár tribe of carpenters
who have similarly changed their origioal occupation ; and thirdly,
the Gádiya Lohár, a class of wandering blacksmiths not uncommon
throughout the east and south-east of the Province, who come up
from Rajputana and the United Provinces and travel about with
their families and implements in carts from village to village, doing
the finer sorts of iron work which are beyond the capacity of the
village artisan. They derive their name from their carts wbich are
of poculiar shape. The tradition runs that the Suthár Lohárs, who
are now Musalmán, were originally Hindu Tarkháns of the Suthár
tribe, and that Akbar took 12,000 of them from Jodhpur to Delhi,
forcibly circumcised them, and obliged them to work in iron instead
of wood. The story is admitted by a section of the Lohárs themselves,
and probably has some substratum of truth. These men came to
Sirsa from the direction of Sindh, where they say they formerly held
land, and are commonly known as Multáni Lohárs. They are
divided into two groups, the Barra and Bhatti which intermarry. The
Ját and Suthar Lohårs stand highest in rank, and the Gádiya lowest.
They do not, it is said, eat, driok or smoke with other Lohárs,
and are possibly aborigines. Similar distinctions doubtless exist in
other parts of the Punjab.
The Lobár of the Kullu hills is probably a Dági who has taken
to the blacksmith's trade and so lost status, for the Dágis of the
present day will not eat with him. On the other hand the Lohár
will not eat the flesh of cattle who have died a natural death,
The iron-smelter is termed dhogri.* In Láhul the Lobárs are not
numerous, and but few of them now work as blacksmiths,t but
they rank below the Dági and intermarry with Heosis and
Bárosas. Dagis will, however, take Lohár girls to wife (but not
vice versa) and a Dági ard Löhár will smoke together from the same
pipe. In Spiti the Lohár, Zon or Zobo, stands midway between the
Chházang and the Hensi or Betu.' A Chházang will eat from his hand,
but intermarriage is deprecated. If however a Chházang take a
Lohár wo:nan into his house, other Chházangs will not refuse to eat
from his bands. The offspring of such a 'marriage' is called Argun,
and an Argun will marry with a Lohár. The Lohárs are skilful smiths,
making pipes, tinder-boxes, bits, locks and keys, knives, choppers,
hies, ploughshares and chains. Some of their work is of quaint and
intricate vattern. The articles are generally made to order, the smith
receiving food and wages, and being supplied with the iron. Lohárs
are employed to beat drums at marriages and at festivals in the
monasteries. They seldom own land. I
* The Lohár in Kullu is both a blacksmith and an iron-smelter. The Báraçar or Bálpas
are also occasionally employed on iron.smelting, but their real occupation is making baskets
from the hill bamboo, nirgál : cf. Nirgálu.
† In Lábul a fow fields called gar-sing are generally beld rent.free by a few families of
Lohárs, not so much in lieu of service, for they are paid for their work separately, as to
help them to a livelihood and induce them to settle down.
I Maclagan also mentions the Gera or Gára of Spiti as & distinct caste of blacksmiths,
and adds that an agriculturist cannot take & Gärą woman to wife without himself becoming
a Gára



Lohnú- Luddu,
In the hills round Simla the Lohárs are ironsmiths. They marry
within the iribe as well as with Báşhis or carpenters and Barehļas or
goldsmiths, whose customs are similar to those of the Başhis and
Lohárs. All three groups are servants of the landowners, from
whom they receive food and at harvest time a share of grain oalled
shikota. The Kanets and higher castes will not drink with the
Báşhis as they receive dues on the occasions of funerals and are conse-
quently considered unclean.
In the higher Simla hills the Lohárs intermarry with the Báshis or
masons, but a Bárhi can enter a Hindu kitchen, rasoi, or the place
where the chula is, with his tools in his hand to effect repairs, and
apparently a Lohár cannot do so. The Báphis can wear gold orna.
ments, but may only don a sihra or chaplet of flowers by permission,
and the Lohárs are equally subject to this rule. Kanets will not drink
water touched by a Lohár or a Báſhi. Neither caste intermarries with
Kolie or Dágis. In the lower hills the Bárhi is said to be a distinct
caste from the Lohárs as both are so numerous that brides can always
be found within the caste. In the Simla hills the Bharera is a silver-
smith who intermarries with the Lohárs, and with the Badhela.
LOHnú, a sept of Rájputs, descended from Nának Chand, 4th son of Tárá
Chand, 31st Raja of Kahlúr.
LOARA, (1) a low caste which lives by making string, found in Karnál. To
the east of Thánesar no cultivator will grow sani (the leguminous
Crotolaria), but he will permit a Lohra to do so: (2) also a section of
the Oswal Bhábras.
LOHRAG, see under Cháhzang.
Lohriá, an ironmonger.
LOLA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
LOLEKí, a Sát clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
LON-CHRENPA, see under Cháhzan-
LON-PA, see under Cháhzang.
LORÍMALÁNĄH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
LoThá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
LUBána, see Labána.
LUDDU. -A tribe of Rajputs of the second grade, the Luddu are found in
certain talúkas of the Una tahsil in Hoshiarpur. The heads of thoir
families are styled Rái, the chief being the Rái of Bhabaur, and much
of the Bet or riverain in Núrpur pargana appears to have been held in
foriner times by petty Luddu Ráos under the Kángra Rájás, and their
descendants still retain the custom of primogeniture with mere guzára
or maintenance to younger sons.
The Luddus are Súraj-bansi by descent. About 2,400 years ago,
they say, Bhúm Chand, a Suraj-bansi Rájá in Kángra, and a devotee of
Durga or Shakti, had a son Susrám Chand, the Susarma of the Mahá-
bhárat. Having married Duryodhan's daughter, Susrám Chand sided
with the Kauravas on the Kurukshetra battle field and returned to
Kángra every day during the fight. One day Bhíma smote Susrám
Chand's elephant with his mace and fractured its skull, but Susrám
I
with the Keing married Durystám Chand, the Kángra, and a years ago,



Iuhani - Lurka.
39
held the sides of the wound together with his fcet and so rode it back
to Kángra. After the war Susarma fell to fighting with Rájá Virata,
an ally of the Pandavas, then ruling in Kashmír. In a battle Susarma
was surrounded and begged for his life which Virata granted on con-
dition that he performed a luddi or jump. Hence the name Laddu
or Luddu. The real rise of the clan, however, appears to date from
Khamb Chand, 21 st in descent from Bhúm Chand, who attacked Nangal
Kalán and its dependencies. He eventually made it his. residence and
married his son to the dauynter of the Basdhawál Rájá, of Bhabaur,
but seeing its prosperity he killed the Rájá and made it his capital.
His son Binne Chand had eight sons. Tradition says that their mother
was blind, but contrived to conceal her infirmity from her husband for
22 years. But one day he discovered it, and pleased with her clever-
ness in concealing it, told her to ask a favour. She begged that although
the custom was for the eldest son to succeed, all her sons should
succeed ; 80 they were all appointed tíkás and their (chief) villages
became known as tíkás, they themselves taking the title of rái.
The families descended from them bear the title or rank of rái and
the heads of these families greet one another with the salutation
jai deo. Younger sons get separate villages or shares of villages
without paying any tálúkdári. A rái is installed and the lilak mark
applied to his forehead by the Rái of Bhabaur, who is the head of the
rai families and to whom a horse, a shawl and, if means permit, money
is presented on this occasion. Until the tilak is thus applied the title
of rái cannot be assumed. The Rai of Bhabaur is similarly installod
by the Rájá of Goler in Kángra
LUHÁNI, see under Nuháni.
Lunár, see Lohár.
Lustíá, see Lobțiá.
Luna, a Mohammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Lond, a large BALOCH tribe, divided into two tumans-Sori and Tibbi Lund,
99.v.
LUNGHERE, a tribe of Játs.
LÓNI, LAORNI, a small tribe of the Miána branch of the Patháns, found on the
Dera Ismail Khán border. Its weakness is due to the encroachments of
the Marri and other Baloch tribes.
LÓNÍ, Loni, a group of potters, found in Jhang, who claim to have been
originally Chaddrar Játs.
...citesche herause the car their nagte
They tabu the use of green clothes and blue
dhotis or waist-cloths, because they say their ancestors' tomb is cover.
punes and out
ed with a green cloth and one of their forebears died, as after being
bitten by a mad dog some one placed a blue cloth over him. Some of
the younger generation now wear clothes of green and blue mixed, but
never of pure green or blue.
LUB, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar:
LURA, a Muhammadan Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomert.
LORKA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.



M
MÁCHHI, MÁCHCHHI, fem. Máchhan, Machbáni, cf. machhúá, a fisherman,
fishmonger. Known in Peshawar as Machohháti, Machchhliwal and
Machchhiwáni, the Machhi is the western Panjabi pame for the
Jhínwar, but in Multan, Dera Ghazi Khán and Bahawalpur the Machhi
forms a distinct tribe which ranks as Ját. In all the northern Dis.
tricts of the Punjab the Macbhi is also called a Jhínwar and in the
western Districts both names, where used at all, are applied in different
ly to the same person. But in parts of the Central Punjab, where the
eastern Hindu meets the western Musalmán, the two terms are
generally used distinctively. The Máchhi occupies in the centre and
west the same position which the Jbínwar fills in the east, save
that he performs in the former parts of the Punjab a considerable
part of the agricultural labour, while in the east he seldom actually
works in the fields, or at least not as a part of his customary duties,
though of course all classes work for pay at harvest time, when the
rice is being planted out, and so forth. But besides the occupations
already described for the Jhínwar, the Máchhi is the cook and
midwife of the Punjab proper. All the Dáyas and Dáyis, the
acconcheur, midwife, and wet-nurse class, are of the Jhínwar or
Máchhi caste.* So too the common oven which forms so important a
feature in the village life of the Punjab proper, and at which the pea.
santry have their bread baked in the hot weather, is almost always
in the hands of a Máchhi for Musalmáns and a Jhinwar for Hindus.
In some parts he is also the woodcutter of the village. In the Deraját
he is sometimes called Manjhi or Manjhera,+ more particularly when
following the occupation of a fisherman, and the name Men is often
given him under the same circumstances in the rest of the Central and
Western Punjah, along the banks of our great rivers. Both these
castes may be classed as a Máchhi, as may also the Sammi or fisherman
and quailcatcher, and the Mahigir, Machhahra, Machhiyánia, or fisher.
man. But the Men, Meun or Meo appears to be quite distinct from the
Máchhi.
The Muhammadan Máchhis of Kapurthala State say that they
came from Ajmer in the time of Humáyún and Akbar some centuries
ago. The Archangel Gabriel first carried water in a skin and they
follow in his footsteps. But more immediately all the Mácbhi gots go
back to Qutb Shah, their common ancestor. Doubtless a tradition of
spiritual descent is here hinted at. The Machhi sections in this State
are :-Sont, Phabbe, Thammam, Khokhar, Pháno, Sangri, Mehrás,
Soranch, Gár, Wajan, Phabú, Khose, Syál, Bhote, and several others.
But marriage is of course allowed within the section, as they are
Muhammadans.
* So Ibbetson, $ 619. But women of various low castes act as midwives, dai, throughout
the Punjab, Tho Daya forms a caste whosó women are hereditary wet-nurses to Rájput
families on the borders of Rájputána; but it is doubtful if the Daya is ever employed as an
accoucheur though the Census returns show dryas as such by occupation as well as by caste.
+ The Manchbari who are boatmen and fishermen are said to be a sept of the Malláhe
or Mohánas.



Máchhi customs.
Any outsider is allowed to learn Máchhi's work as an apprentice, but
is never permitted to form marriage relations with the caste. Early
marriage is the rule, bu's in case of necessity adult marriage is allowed.
Betrothals are thus arranged. After preliminary enquiries the boy's
father makes a proposal of marriage to the girl's father, and when it is
accepted he goes with some of his relations to her house, taking with
him some clothes, a few silver ornaments, some gur and pinnián.
The betrothal ceremony is then performed in the presence of the
barádri and fees are given to the lágis. The bride's father gets
clothes and abouť Rs. 14 in cash and the boy's father incurs an
expenditure of some Rs. 40. The girl's father then takes leave of
the boy's father giving him a dastár and a sheet. If his means
allowed, he also gives dastárs and sheets to all who accompany
him. The guests are detained for a day or two. The girl's fatber
then axes the date of the wedding in consultation with the barádri
and deputes the barber with a tewar and a gand (a piece of thread)
to announce the date fixed to the boy's father. On receiving these the
boy's father summons his barádri and inform them of the date. Then
Rs. 50 or Rs. 60 on a thál or plate are put before the barber who takes
one rupee as his fee and Rs. 11, Rs. 21, or Rs. 25 or as much as he may
be told to take for the girl's father. On the date fixed the barát
consisting of 10, 15 or 20 persons, as means permit, goes to the bride's
house and halts near it. The girl's father on hearing of its arrival
sends sharbat for the party through the barber. The barber gets a
rupee as his fee for offering the sharbat and then the milní ceremony
is performed through him. He brings a basket of shakkar to the
bridegroom's father who puts as much money as the girl's father
may demand into it. The bride's father then presents a rupee to
the boy's father for the milni and gives another rupee to the Barwala
on his way. On entering the house, the girls bar the way and
only let the procession pass on getting two rupees to buy parched
grain. When it is eaten, the bride's father gets a rupee from the
boy's father and gives it to the Mirási. After this, the wedding
is solemnized by a Mián in the presence of two witnesses. A
dower of Rs. 32 is then given. The barát is detained for one or
more nights as means allow. Dowry is alsс given to the bride
by her father to the extent of his means. After the wedding the
bride's father obtains money from the boy's father to pay the lágis'
fees, the use of the mosque, and so on.
The Machhis in Bahawalpur State are also called Takráni (Sindhi
takkar, mountain). They are virtually confined to the detached area,
lying south of the State, known as Fatehpur-Máchhká. They have ten
septs :-
(i) Takráni or Dagráni, the (iv) Shahláni.
(viii) Kiryani.
sept of the chiefs. 1 (0) Jumláni, or Jumrâni. (ix) Ghúti.
(ii) Laláni.
(vi) Guláni."
(s) Juwman.
(iii Baláni,
(vii) Sidqáni.
These Máchhis say they are a branch of the Solgis (Saljukis) and
came from Halab (Aleppo) in Syria to Karbala, where they were settled
when the Imam Husain was killed there. They claim to have been his
followers and interred his body after his martyrdom, but their enemies



Madah-Madári.
say that they were his foes and that Shimar the Cruel was of their
race. From Karbala they migrated via Southern Persia and Afghán.
istán to Kech-Mekrán, thence to Bela Jhal, and thence to Qalát where
they remained some time. Finally they settled in Shikárpur. Early
in the 18th century they were allies of the Kalhoras against the
Dáudpotraș at the battle of Shikárpur. Massu Khán, Machhi, then
founded Massuwála in the Jacobabad District, but when the Kalhoras
took Haidarábád and Shikárpur, they leased the tract of Ubaura to the
Dabrs, who unable to repel the inroads of the Sáhu freebooters of
Jaisalmir, called on Sultan Khán, Son of Massu phán, to aid them
against the Sáhus, in return for lands in Ubaura. Sultán Khán was
migratiug to Ubaura when he heard that the Sáhus were besieging
that fort and suddenly attacked the besiegers. The Dáhrs also sallied
forth and the Sáhus thus surrounded were utterly defeated, but the
total loss on both sides was believed to amount to 100,000 men, whence
the depression near Ubaura was named Lákhi. In return the Dáhrs
gave the Máchbis the tract between Lakhi and Massuwála, both tribes
holding, as joint lessees of the Kalhoras. But when the Talpur Wazírs
usurped the government of the Kalhoras they resumed the lease and
wrested all their lands from the Máchbis except Fatehpur and Mácbhka,
which became a part of Baháwalpur. The Máchhis remained loyal to
the Nawáb of that State, when the Dáudpotras of Kot Sabzal rose in
rebellion, and still boast that they received Rs. 5 for every rebel's head.
The Machhi Sardárs are named alternately Sultán Khán and Jahán
Khán. The Mách his are exceedingly obedient to their chief, who is
sole owner of the tribal territory (78,000 bighas in area) of Fatehpur
Máchhka, the tribesmen being his tenants, and he settles all disputes
as to custom and other domestic matters. The Máchhis, like the
Baloch, do not cut the hair or shave, nor do they wear black, and all of
them usually live in sahals, for, however rich a Máchhi may be, he will
always have a roof of reeds, not of beams and rafters.
The Machhis of Dajal and Rájap pur in Derá Gházi Kbán also declare
that members of their tribo are to be found among the Brahúis (or
highlanders) of Balochistán. They say that the Prophet was once at
war and gave orders that all his followers should abstain from intere
course with his wife till victory was assumed, but Okel, one of his
soldiers, disobeyed him and his wife bore a son, who to avoid detection
was cast into a river and eaten by a fish. Muhammad, however,
restored the boy to life and his descendanis were styled Máchhi.
The Máchhis of Khwáspur in Gujrát were converted to Islám by
Khwás Khán and styled Islámsháhi or Salimshábi after the name of
the son of the emperor Sher Shah. They were bhattiáras of the sarai at
Khwaspur.
Madar, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
M ár fem. MADÁRAN.—A follower of Zinda Sháh Madár,* the celebrated .
saint of Makanpur in Oudh. His name was Bázi-ul-dín Shah, and he
was a converted Jew who was born at Aleppo in A.D. 1050, and is said
to have died at Makanpur at the mature age of 383 years after expelling
* Madár in Padjábi means the juice of the ak plant.



Maddoke-Mahajan.
a demon called Makan Deo from the place. He is supposed by some
to be still alive (whence his name), Mubammad having given him the
power of living without breath. His devotees are said never to be
scorched by fire, and to be secure against venomous snakes and scorpions,
the bites of which they have power to cure. Women who enter his
sbrine are said to be seized by violent pain as though they were being
burnt alive. Found in Ambála, Ludhiana Jullundur, Hoshiárpur,
Amritsar, Sialkot and Ferozepur, they are very generally distributed
throughout the eastern half of The Punjab. In the western
Punjab they seem to be almost unknown. They wear their bair
matted and tied in a knot, and belong to the beshara section of Muham.
madan orders, who regard no religion, creed, or rules of life, though
they call themselves Musalmán.
MADDOKE, a Kharra) clan (agricoltural) found in Montgomery.
MADIR, * Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MADHAOL, a Khurral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MADEK, a Hindu Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Madará, of medium size, a caste of Brahmans. Panjabi Dictionary, p. 694.
(?)=Maddham.
Mádro, a term for the Bháſra in Rawalpindi. Also a group of the BRÁrs.
MADRÁsı or MANDRÁJI : chiefly applied in the Punjab to the servants of
Europeans from Madras.
Mage, an A ráíņ clao (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
Maqe, a small caste found in the Naraingarh tahsil of Ambála.
MAGHIÁNA, a sept of the Sials, which gives its dame to Jhang-Maghiána, the
head-quarters of the Jhang District.
Magsí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MABÁBRAHMAN, the great Brahman' or Achárj, the Brahman who performs
funeral ceremonies. After the cremation he is seated on the dead
man's bedstead and the sons lift him up, bedstead and all, and make
obeisance to him. He then receives the bedstead and all the wearing
apparel of the dead man. He rides on a donkey, and is considered
80 impure that in many villages be is not allowed to come inside the
gate.
MAHAD, a Ját clau (agricultural) found in Multán.
MAHÁJAN, fem. -I, lit. great folk,* a title bestowed on the Bánia through.
out the Province. As such it is almost synonymous with Shah, king,'
the popular term for a money-lender. But in the hills the Pabári
Mahájans form an occupational group of shopkeepers which is tend.
ing to form a true caste. The Mahajans are of composite origin, as a
Brabman shopkeeper is called a Mahájan, though most of the Mahajans
* There appears to be a punning allusion in the term mahá. jan to the reluctance of the
Bánia, especially if he be a Jain and a Bhábra, to take life. But while the Bhábra is a
professing Jain, the Mabájan is a Hindu.-



Káhal-Mahúr.
.
appear to be Bánias, Bohrás* or Káraths who have intermarried or
espoused wives of the lower Rájput grades, such as the Ráthis and
Ráwats. A Mahájan is essentially a trader or skopkeeper and a
Mahajan who becomes a clerk is termed a káith. In Hazára Mahajan
hardly means more than a Hill Brahman who takes service, cultivates,
keeps a shop or acts as a priest. In Gurdaspur and Sialkot the
Mahajan is also styled a Karár or Kirár.
Among the Mahájans of Kangſa the following sections, wbich appear
to be totemistic, have been noted :-
(0) Bheſú, said to be derived from bhedi, ewe.'
(ii) Makkerru, said to be from makki, a bee.
(iii) Koháru, an axe or chopper.
MÁHAL, MÁHIL, & small Ját tribe which appear to be chiefly found in
Jullundur and Amritsar. Their ancestor is said to have been a Rájput
from Modi in the Málwa
MAHAní, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán. Doubtless=Mahni.:.
MAHANT, fem. -NI. The head of any Hindu dera or religious institution. A
sri-mahant is the head of a group of derás or of a head derá.
MAHAR, Mahir, fem. -1, (1) a title among Játs, and more especially among
Siáls and Drakháns or Tarkháns in the south-west. It appears to be
merely a dialectical form of Mihr; (2) Ját clan (agricultural; found in
Multán and in Montgomery. It is Hindu ia the latter District.
MAHÁR, a tribe of Rájput status, claiming descent from Mahár, a brother of
Joiya, and found almost exclusively along the Sutlej, opposite Fázilká, in
Montgomery. Like the Joiyas they came from Bahawalpur, but are
said to be quarrelsome, silly, trickish, fond of cattle and indifferent to
agriculture. Contrary to Ját custom sons generally inherit per stirpes
(chúndavand). Also found in Amritsar and Multán, and in Baháwal-
pur, in which Ştate they are described as an important tribe claimipg
descent from Mahár, an elder brother of Joiya, sons of Iyán and Ráni
Nal, daughter of Rája Chuharhar. The Joiyas while admitting this
claim to kinship, say that Mahár was sister's son to Joiya's mother.
Mahár was born in Chuharhar, and Wag, his grandson, became rájá of
Gash-Mathíla and Kot Sanpli. He had a son, Sanwra, whose descend-
ants the Sanwrepotre or Mahárs are found in Sirsa. Sanwra's brothers
drove him out of Gash-Mathila and so he settled in the Shahir Farid
peshkári of Bahawalpur. During the ascendancy of the Lakhweras,
to whom the Mahárs used to pay a fourth of their produce, the son of
* The Bohras of Simla are all immigrants from the plains, and aro said to have first
come to Kángra from Poona and Satára. The story goes that Rájá Nirandar Chand of
Kángļa died, leaving a widow who was with child. Fearing lest she should suffer at the
hands of her husvand's hcirs, she went to her parents in the Deccan, and on ihe way gave
birth to Rájá Shehr Chand. Witb him she reached her paternal home at Poona. But when
the boy, who was brought up by his grandfather, came of age and learnt that Kángra was
his inheritance, he determined to conquer his kingdom. With an army of his grand-
father's subjects he attacked Kángļa, subdued those who had occupied the throne and
re gained his paternal kingdom. Díwán Rúp Lál, Bohra, who was sent with the Rájá by
his grandfather, was made minister, and by degrees members of his family came and
settled in Kángra. Some of them went to Rupar and other parts of the country for trade.
As they knew Urdu, Hindi and Nágri, so they were everywhere respected and honourably
entertained.



Mahará-Maheshari.
the Khwaja Núr Muhammad.(Qibla-i-Alam), Mián Núr-us-Samad, was
assassinated by two Mahárs and a Joiya, and a long time after Qázi
Muhammad 'Aqil of Mithankot claimed blood-money in the court of
his murid Sadiq Muhammad Khán II of Bahawalpur. The claim was
allowed against the assassins' descendants, who were ordered to pay
200 buffaloes or 100 camels to the descendants of the martyr,' but as
they could not pay this fine the Mahárs had to transfer to them the
ownership of half of their village, Mahárán, and since then they have
sunk gradually.
Mahásá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MÁHARA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MAHARÁNA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MÁHA WÁL, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MAHÁTMÁ, one who has attained the highest degree in the order of the JOGIS.
MAHE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Shahpur: also found
in Multán where they are described as pilgrims from Jammu who settled
there in the time of Shah Jahán.
Mahusí, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MAHEgar, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MAHESHARÍ, MAHESARÍ, from Mahes, Mahesar, a title of Mabádov: a secta
arian division of the Bániás. The origin of the Maheshari is shrouded
in soide mystery. An offshoot of the Bánia caste, they are to be dis-
tinguished from the Bhábrás as they do not follow Jainism in any of
its forms. The Bhábras and all the Jains disown them and the
Mahesharis themselves recognise that they are a distinct sub-caste of the
Bániás. In matters of dietary and social intercourse some of these
men may have leanings to Jain ideas, and it is possible that at one time
they entered the Jain fold but probably more by way of protest agaiost
the thraldom of caste, which seems to assign to the Maheshris a some-
what inferior position, than as converts to Jain religious doctrines. As
a body, the Mahesharis, as their name implies, are strict followers of
Hinduism and observe the same religious rites and social customs as
are prevalent in sub-castes of Bánias other than the Bhábras. There
are, however, certain points which distinguish them from the rest of
the Bánias : (a) the Maheshris are not included in the 171 gots of the
Bániás, on the contrary they say they have 721 gots of their own,*
(b) their parohits are not Gaur Brahmaps, (c) in marriage only two
gots are excluded among the Aggarwal Bániás, whereas among the
Mahesharis marriage is allowed within the four gots.
The home of the Mahesharis is in Márwar in Rajputána, at Darwáná,
Nágaur, Ajitgarh, and other places, whence they have migrated to
the centres of commercial activity in Northern India. A tradition,
current in Delhi, regarding their origin says that a Kshatriyá Rájá had
many sons who with other princes set to hunt in a jungle, in pursuit of
game. The princes reached a secluded spot where a band of rishis was
sitting absorbed in meditation and a sacrificial yajna. In the exuberance
* In Hissár these are said to be Rájput gots or clans.



Mahi-Mahr.
47
of youth the princes disregarded the solemn nature of the occasion and
interrupted the penances of the rishis. Annoyed at this intrusion the rishis
cursed the princes and they were turned into stones. Search was made for
them and the Rájá with his Ráni and others besought the rishis but the
latter were obdurate until Shiva (Mahes with his consort (Shri Pár-
vati) chanced to pass by and through th ir intercession the princes were
restored to life. This penalty was, however, imposed on the king's family
that thereafter his descendants should not call themselves Kshatriyás
but Mahesharis. Nevertheless, despite their obligations to Shiva, the
Mahesharis are described as Vaishnavas.*
Mahí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Mání, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Mariál, see Muhiál.
Mánígír, a fisherman (Pers. máhi-gir), equivalent to the Sanskrit Nisháda
or Párasava whose status was equated to that of a man begotten by a
Brahman on a Sudra woman : Colebrooke's Essays, p. 272,
Mahil, a palace: so a queen ; a title of respect given to the wives of the
Sikh Gurus. Panjabi Dicty., p. 699.
Mahir, fem. -í, see Mahar.
MAHIRÁ, (1) a title of respect given to the Kahár or Jhínwar caste ; (2) a
palanquin bearer. See Mahrá. The fem. Mahiri is defined as (1) the
wife of a village headman, (2) a female of the Gujar, Aráin or Jhinwar
castes, and (3) as a title given to a man's second wife. See Panjabi
Dicty., pp. 700-1.
Mabitá,= Mahta, q. v.
MAHITON, a caste of Rajputs who wear the Brahmanical thread and live by
agriculture. Panjabi Dicty., p. 701. See Mahton.
Másl, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
Mahli, a Hindu Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MAHLUKE, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MAHMAND, see Mohmand.
MAHNESE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Maoni, (1) a clan of the Siáls, now almost extinct, cf. Mahant ; (2) a Dogar
clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MAHNIKE, the clan of the Chadhars to which Sahibán belonged. For her
legend see the Montgomery Gazetteer, 1899, p. 81.
MAHAN, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MAHOTA, a Ját clan, found in tahsil Multán: originally of Umarkot, in Sind.
MAHPÁL, a branch of the Lodi Patháns. At present little known the
Mahpál are akin to the Súr and Nuhani Pathans, being descended.
from their eponym, a son of Ismail, son of Siánai, son of Ibrabím Lodai.
MAHB, a tribe found in Bahawalpur, who have been identified with the Meds
of the Arabian historians. They have nine septs :-
Channar, Hasnáne, Rukráni, Tagáni, Laláni, Sherwani, Make-Mahr.
Matuje, Sukhíje.
* Hissár Gasetteer, 1904, p. 76.



Mahra Mahratta.
Their chief or Khán is a Sukhíja of Khangarh in Shikárpur and 10
other Mahr will sit on the same chårpái with him. They derive theit
name from Mehtar prince, but some of them give their genealogy
thus :
Mahr.
Dumbar.
Baráji.
Rikh.
Seru.
Sahns-pán.
Dipár,
Winja.
Kirpar.
Lúkhá.
Dhárá, founder of Dhárá-nagri in Sind.
These names also occur in the genealogies of certain Rajput tribes,
such as the Joiya, Wattu and Samma.
Sir H. Elliot* was of opinion that the root of Mahr, Mer or Man
could be traced in various place-Dames in the Punjab, such as Mera
10 miles west of Kallar Kahár. This theory would give them a
northern origin, but it is not in accord with this fact that the Mahrs
and the Kahiris were attendants of the Abbási Dáúdpotrás when they
migrated from Shikárpur to the country which now forms the State of
Baháwalpur.
MAHBA, a sept of Mahammadan Játs, akin to the Lakhas (g. v.), and found
in Rájanpur tahsil of Dera Ghazi Khán: also, it is said, in larger
numbers in Alipur tahsil, Muzaffargarh. Their tradition is that they
were originally styled Chughattas and settled near Delbi till 10 or 11
generations back, when the whole tribe was exterminated with the
exception of a boy who was found lying among the slain and thence
named Mara or Mebra. He and his descendants migrated to the
banks of the Indus.
MAHRA, MEHRA, a term of respect applied to individuals of the Jhínwar or
Kahár caste rather than a tribal name, but apparently all Hindu
Jhínwars are called Mahra in the westero Punjab and Mahaon in the
Central Districts also. Cf. Mabirá.
MARRATTA, a group of Brahmans, a relic of the Mahratta supremacy, still
found in the Báwal nizámat of Nábha. The Gaurs were, it is said,
constrained by the Mahratta conquerors to consent to intermarry
with them. The Brahmans first settled in this tract in the Mahratta
service and now regard parohitaí as degrading. There are also a fow
in Charkhi and Dadri in Jind territory and in the town of Rewari, but
they are mainly found in Gwalior. They use the Hindi and Persian
characters, but do not learn Sanskrit or teach it to their children lest
they should become parohits.
* History of India, I, p. 630,



Mahri- Mahtam.
MAHRI, a got of the Telís.
MAHSI, an Aráiņ and also a Kamboh clan (both agricultural) found in
Amritsar.
MAHSÚD, see Wazír.
MAATÁ, MADITA, MEHTA, (1) a title of respect applied to Brahmans and
others; (2) the title of an official in the Simla Hills who was in charge
of a pargana ; (3) a section of the Punjabi Khatris. The word
appears to rear a measurer, moderator or arbiter.' See also Mahton.
MAHTAM, MÁTAM.—A caste of obscure and probably composite origin found
spread across the Punjab from Dera Gházi Khán to Lahore. The
name Mahtam is phonetically identical with the term MAHTON, but the
Mahton of the eastern districts* elects to be called a ' Rájput Mahta.'
As a maker of ropes the Mahtam is called Rassiwat, or Rassibat, and
as a dweller in sirkis or wattled screens he is often styled Sirkiband.
The true Mahtam is to be distinguished from the Múthbhari or
Mahgír group of the Mahtams which is addicted to theft and is dis-
owned by the rest of the caste.
The Mahtams appear to have migrated from the west along the
great rivers and it will be best to describe thom first as found in Baha-
walpur and Dera Gházi Khán. In the former State their Guru, him-
self a Mabtam, gives them the following genealogy :-
Rája Bhim Sain of Delhi.
Mogh-warn.
Gahroká.
Mahi.
Tat.
:
And from Mahi, their eponym, the Mahtams claim descent. This
account gives them an eastern origin and appears to connect them
with the Meghs. In the District of Dera Gházi Khán a few localised
gots appear to be found, but the local death customs merit our attention.
A Hindu Mahtam is as a rule neither buried nor burnt, but consigned
to a stream, with three pitchers full of sand tied to his neck, chest and
vaist, while in Bruceábad and Jámpur tahsil the body is either burnt
or buried. The funeral rites of a Mabtam are performed by a Jájik
Brahman. .
In these tracts, and in Multánt and Montgomery the Mahtam does
not rank high. He is a tenant or labourer, but not infrequently owns
land, and stray Mahtam villages are even to be found. But their
chief occupation is snaring the wild pig in the trap (cavur) which is
found in every Mahtain but.
For this equation cf. gáon, gám: noon, nám Mr Maclagan totes Kahlam as a variant
of Kahlon. The word mahalta ma appears in the Rájatarangini as a term for minister.'
It appears to be the original form of Mahtam. Cf. inahattara and mihtar...
it In Multán most of the Mahtams are Mubammadans of Ját status and Mahtams merely
by tribe. The other Mahtams are low caste Hindus.
The snare from which the Bauria also takes his name.



50
The Mahtams.
Widow remarriage is permitted among the llahtams, but where the
caste has social aspiration, e.g. in Lahore, it is discouraged or only
permitted with the husband's younger brother. In Lahore the Hindu
Mahtams are said to wear the choti but not the janeo.
The traditions of the Mahtams are very diverse, as bas already been
indicated. In Lahore they claim Jaimal and Fatah as their forebears,
and say they came from Delhi. But the Játs were their great rivals,
and after Akbar had married Mihr Mitha's daughter they incurred
his resentment and were banished,
The late Sir Denzil observed that the Mahtam were also called Bah.
rúpia—those of Gujrát and Sialkot having returned themselves under
that name. He added: “The Mahtams, or as they are called in the
Jullundur Division Mahton (nasal n), are found chiefly in the Sutlej
valley, and along the foot of the hills between Jullundur and Gujrát.
They are of exceedingly low caste, being almost outcasts; by origin
they are vagrants, and in some parts they apparently retain their
wandering habits, while everywhere they are still great hunters, using
nooses like those of the Bawarias. But in many Districts, and especially
on the middle Sutlej, they have devoted themselves to busbandry
and are skilful and laborious cultivators. The great majority of them
are classed as Hindus, but about one-fifth are Musalmán, and as many
again Sikh. But the Musalmán section, even in the Multán Division,
eat wild pig and retain most of their Hindu customs, and are conse-
quently not admitted to religious equality by the other Musulmáns.
They appear, however, to bury their dead. They live, in Muzaffargarh,
in grass huts on the river banks, whence the saying 'Only two
Maňtam huts and calls itself Khairpur.' Mr. Purser thus described
the Mahtams of Montgomery :-
1 They are a low Hindu caste, and are looked down on by their neighbours. Their story
is that they were Rájputs, and one of their ancestors was a kánúngo. Akbar was then on
the throne. Kánúngos were called mahta, and thus they got their name. The first mahta
mas dismissed, and then settled at Mahtpur in Jullundur. His descendants emigrated and
settled along the banks of the rivers as they found quantities of sarr in such situations, and
working in sarr was their chief occupation. It was not till the Nakkái chiefs held sway
that they settled down permanently in this District. They adopted the custom of marriace
with widows according to the form of chaddar dálna, and so became Sudras. They are
also called 'Bahrúpias,' which name is a corruption of 'Bho-rúp-ias,' and means pecple of
many modes of life, because they turned their hands to any business they could find (yet
of select Glossary, J, 17 and 54). Cunningham (Hist. of the Sikhs, p. 17) says, 'the hardwork.
ing Hindu Mahtams are still moving family by family and village by village eastward away
from the Rávi and Chenab.' This would seem to give the Mahtams a western instead of
eastern origin as claimed by them. They own a good many villages (19), most of which
are in good condition, Where they are not proprietors of the whole village, they reside in
a separate group of huts at some distance from the main abadi. They are great hands at
Catching wilă pigs; but it is in cutting down the jungle on inundated lands that they excel.
Though industrious they do not care much for working wells, and prefer cultivating lands
flooded by the rivers. They are quarrelsome and addicted to petty thieving. They are of
medium stature and stoutly made.
Sir Denzil's account continued :- There is a Bahrúp tribe of Banjáras
or, as they are called in the Punjah, Labápas ; and the Labánas and
Mahtams of the Sutlej appear closely to resemble each other. Elliott's
description of the Bahrup Banjáras at p. 54, Vol. I, of his Races of the
North-West Provinces, tallies curiously in some respects with that of
the Bahrúpia Mahtams of Gujrát given by Captain Mackenzie at $ 71 of
his Settlement Report of that District; and on the whole it seems pro-



Mahtarmahli-Mahton.
51
bable that the Mahtams are Banjáras or Labánas, in which case it is
possible that the Sutlej group have come up from Rajputána, while the
sub-inontane group are merely a western continuation of the Banjáras
of the lower hills. This is the more probable as I find that the
Jullundur Mahtams trace their origin from Jammu, conquered Ráhon
from the Gújars, and were in turn deprived of it by the Ghorewaha
Rájputs probably not less than five centuries ago. At the same time I
should note that the Mahton of Hoshiarpur and the neighbourhood
appear to hold a much higher social position than the Mahtams of the
Sutlej ; and it may be that the two are really distinct. Sardár Gur-
diál Singh indeed goes so far as to say that the Mahton of Hoshiarpur
are of good Rájput blond, though they have lost caste by taking to
ploughing and practising widow-marriage, and that their social stand-
ing is not much below that of Rájputs. He thinks that the name
may be derived from Mahta, which he says is a title of honour current
among the Rájputs of the hills ; and this agrees with the Montgomery
tradition quoted above. The late Mr. A. Anderson also gave the
Hoshiarpur Mahtons high social standing. On the other hand, Sir
James Wilson said that the Labánas of Sirsa would scout the idea of
connection with the Mahtams of the Sutlej, whom they consider utter-
ly inferior to themselves.'
The following is a list of the Mahtam gots :-
Baksáwan, Multán.
Mandal, Dera Ghazi Khán.
Báwrá, Multán.
Manhánas (? Manhás), Multán.
Bhatti, passim.
Parbar, Montgomery: Parwár, Multán.
Bhichar, Dera Gházi Khán.
Pok (Búk, Bok), Montgomery.
Chauhán, Hoshiárpur,
Punwar, Dera Ghizi Khán.
Dandal, dal, Multán and Dera Gházi Khán. Rai, Amritsar.
Dilasari, Montgomery and Dera Gházi Rawari, Montgomery.
| Khán:? =Wilá Sara.
Sanora, Dera Zháại Khán.
Dosa, Derá Gháại Khán.
Sardia, Amritsar.
Ghogha, Lahore and Montgomery.
Saroi, Lahore.
Ikwán, Lahore.
Seotara, Lahore.
Jandi, Montgomery.
Sirari. Montgomery.
Kachauri, Multan and Montgomery; also Sauni, Lahore and Montgomery.
called Kapúr in Lahore.
Taur, Amritsar.
Karnáwal, Karnúl, Montgomery and Dera Totum, Montgomery.
| Ghái Khán.
Tunwar, also called Jhanda, Lahore.
Katwál, Montgomery : Katwal, Dera Gházi Wachowalá, Multán and Dera Ghazi Khán.
Khán.
Vanura, Dera Ghazi Khán called Vanwr,
Khokhar, Amritsar : also called Chotá in Multán.
Lahore.
War., War-wál, Lahore, Montgomery and
Mádha, Lahore.
Multán.
Malhi, Amritsar.
Wilá Sará, Lahore : see Dilasari.
MAHTARMALAí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Magtrál, a family of Gadhioks, settled at Bhauo in Jhelum.
MAHTON, a caste which claims to be known as Rajput Mahta and is re-
cognised as Rájput Mahtoo. In spite of the occurrence of several
got names in this and in the MAHTAM caste the two castes appear to
be distinct. The Mahton is now enlisted as a 'Rájput Mahtá Sikh.'
In Kapurthala the Mahton tradition is that of the Mahtons Raja
Jai Singh Sawái had two sons, of whom one, Rája Jagná having
quarrelled with his father came to the Punjab and founded Banga*
* Tho shrine of the Mahton's ancestor in Banga was built of bricks from Dhárápagri.



32
The-Mahtons.
www
.
.
At one morame was founded in pur or Jodhpur. and
in Jallundur and Bajaura in Hoshiarpur, Pánchhat in Kapúrthala
being subsequently founded by five of his descendants, while Mahia
his eldest son founded Máyopati in those parts. Again tradition says
that two brothers Ratiji and Matiji came from Ajudhia to Jammu
where the Brahmans invoked their aid against the Muhammadans.
The latter were defeated in a desperate encounter near Jallundur,
Matiji was slain but Ratiji founded five villages.
Similarly from Jammu came Mián Moța, who first settled in Jaswán.
Kopti near Chamba, and then in Rájpur near Hoshiarpur, whence ho
founded Narúr in Kapurthala, naming it after the elder of his two
sona Nár Chand and Zahir Chand.
On the other hand Tharkarwal (also called Randhirgarh) in
Hoshiarpur was founded by a Mahton from Jaipur or Jodhpur, and
thence a village of the same name was founded in the Phagwara tahsil
of Kapurthala.* At one period Mahtons also appear to have been
settled in the Bít Mánaswal plateau in the Hoshiarpur Siwáliks.
The janeo.-As-a rule Mahtons do not appear to wear the janeo,
but their usages vary in this respect. Thus in Kapurthala it is said
to be put on at weddings, but taken off afterwards by the initiated
Sikhs, and only retained by those who are not strict Sikhs.
Wedding rites.-At a wedding the sati, who will be described later,
is propitiated, the bridegroom going to the dádi's place, if in his
village, tendering her respect and offering a rupee and piece of cloth
which are given to her parohit. If the sati's place is not in the
village a chauk is made and the ceremony observed in the bridegroom's
house. When the bride is brought home the ceremony is repeated,
the bride accompanying the bridegroom to the place with her chadar
knotted to his.
Another curious ceremony is observed at Mahton weddings. It is
apparently a relic of swayambara marriage. When the bridegroom
brings home his bride he walks with a reed, on which are seven discs
made of ears of corn, on his shoulder. The legend runs that Dhol,
a brother of Raja Jagdeo, who was a Mahton, was a powerful man and
used to plant his spear in his brother's court whenever he came to
see him. Fearing lest Dhol should oust him from bis throne Jagdoo
asked his wazir's advice, and the latter counselled him to place seven
iron plates under the carpet of the court, but Dhol thrust his spear
through them all and planted it as usual. Jagdeo and his wazár,
ashamed at the failure of this device, craved Dhol's forgiveness, and
so the seven discs are pierced with a reed to this day.
As regards widow remarriage the customs vary-e.g., in Hoshiarpur
the widow always marries her husband's brother, elder or younger,
even if he is already married : yet in Kapúrthala it is asserted that
she can never marry the elder brother,
Religion.---Originally Hindus, many Mahtons have adopted Sikhism,
in one form or another, and a certain number have accepted Islám.
But at least in Hoshiarpur the Hindu Mahtams have strong proclivities
for sati worship. Each got has its own sati or mahásati, bat her
* The Mahtams of Randhirgaſh in Kapúrthala are seuaks of the Bairágio as are the Manj
Rájputs generally,



Mahton Sections.
58
name is hardly ever preserved. The Chauhan and Tavi gots have satis
in their villages, but those of the Jaswál, Bhatti and Punwar are at
Banga in Jullundur. The Manhás however have no sati, but worship
Bábá Matia, lit. the ancestor who was buried alive,' instead,*
The Saroe too worship Bába Bála not a sati.
Every year during the naurátras the place of the sati is visited by
members of the got, who dig a little earth from the spot and throw it
away a short distance off.
Mahtons do not churn milk on the ashtami (8th) or amáwas
(middle) of the month, but use it uncooked or made into curds. The
ashtami is sacred to Durga and the amáwas to ancestors, pitras. The
first and ten successive days' milk of a cow or buffalo is termed
bohli and is not consumed by the man who miiks the animal. Sukrals
will not drink water from wells in Gaſhshankar because they founded
that town and were driven out of it by the Ghorewaha Rájputs. For
a similar reason the Punwárs will not drink from wells in Hihun in
Jullundui. Chauhan and Jaswals will not kill a snake, because
Gugga, to whom snakes are sacred, was a Chauhán Rájput.
The following is a list of the Mahton gots :-
Ajuha,f Hoshiarpur.
Luni, Kapúrthala.
Akún, Kapurthala: cf. Ikwan, a Mahtam Mahid, Kapurthala.
got, in Lahore.
Manhás, Júllundur and Hoshiarpur.
Bádhi, Kapurthala.
Manj,ll Kapúrthala and Hoshiarpur,
Bhadiár, Jullundur and Hoshiarpur. Marhaj, Jullundur.
Bhatti, passim.
Marhatta, ſ Hoshiárpur.
Chandlá, Hoshiarpur.
Pajhota, Jullundur.
Chauhan, Hoshiarpur.
Phengi, Kapurthala.
Dángi, Kapurthala.
Pok (Búk, Bok), Kapurthala : also found as a
Ding, Kapúrthala,
Mahtam got in Montgomery.
Gadera, Kapúrthala.
Punwár,** Jullundur and Hoshiarpur ; also
Gheda, (Hoshiarpur) Jullundur.
found as a Mahtam got in Dera Ghazi Khán.
Hans, Kapúrthala.
Saroi, Juliundur and Hosbiárpur,tt also found
Jaswál,I Kapúrthala and Hoshiarpur.
as a Mahtam got in Lahore,
Jhandi, Kapúrthala: cf. Jandi, à Mahtam Sarwari, Kapurthala.
got in Montgomery.
Sona, Kapurthala.
Jhariál, Jullundur.
Sukrál, Jullundur and Hoshiarpur.
Kachauri, Kapurthala, (also found in Mont Tayáich, Tiach, 17 Jullundur and Hoshiárpur.
gomery and Multán, and called Kapúr Thandal, Hoshiárpur.
in Lahore.
Tuni, Hoshiárpur.
Karaudh, Jullundur and Hoshiarpur. Tunwar, Hoshiarpur ; also found as a Mahtam
Karnáwal, or Karnúl, Kapurthala, Mont. got and called Jhanda in Lahore.
gomery (also found in Dera Gházi Khán) War., War-wal, Kapurthala ; also found as &
Khárbanda,---wanda, Jullundur and Hoshi. Mahtam got in Lahore, Montgomery and
árpur.
Multán.
Khore, Kapurthala.
Wilá Sará, Kapurthala ; also found as & Mah.
Khuttan, Hoshiarpur (? Aktán).
tam got in Lahore: See Dilásari.
* This faintly reminds us of the Mahtam burial customs in Dera Gházi Khán.
† See Karaudh, infra.
The Jaswal of Bhám in Hoshiarpur claim immunity from snake bite.
§ Io Hoshiarpur the Karaudh of the Ajuha got are described as immigrants from Nábha.
|| An al of the Manj, called Ghaind, holds Thakarwal in the Mahilpur thána of Hoshikr.
pur. The Manj in Kapurthala are sevaks of the Bairagis.
(The Marhattas are immigrants from the Deccan: an al called Bhálúra ('holders by
forco ') holds Binjon in Hoshiarpur which it wrested from a Ját in Aurangzeb's time.
** The Punwár have a sati, Ohauhán, at Banga, in Jullundur.
At The Saroe worship a Babá Bálá, whose shrine is at Chukhiara in Jullundur: they also
have a sati at Gaſhshankar.
# The Tiách got once held a group of 12 villages (bárah) in Hoshiarpur.



Mahyár-Mair.
As regards the Mahtons of Hoshiárpur Mr. A. Kensington wrote:
"Ethnologically the most interesting of the people are the Mahtons, who were originally
Rájputs, but have long since degraded in the social scale, owing to their custom of making
karewa marriages with widows. They hold a cluster of important villages in the extreme
north-west of the Gaſhshankar tahsil, and from their isolated social position have a strongly
marked individuality, which makes them at once the most interesting and the most trouble-
some people to deal with. As farmers they are unsurpassed; and, as they have at the
same time given up the traditions of extravagant living by which their Rájput ancestors
are still hampered, their villages are now most prosperous. At the same time this very
prosperity bas caused them to increase at an abnormal rate, while their unfortunato in-
ability to live in harmony together has driven them to subdivide their land to an extent
unknown among other castes. How minute this subdivision is, may be realised from the
fact that, while 4 per cent. only of the tahsil is in their hands, they own 13 per cent. of the
holdings."
Practically the whole of the Mahton villages lie in a cluster in the
north-west of the Gaſhshankar tahsil and in the adjoining Kapurthala
territory. The subdivision of their lands is so minute that sometimes
there is not room for more than two or three furrows of & plough in
their long narrow fields. They are small of stature, of quite remark-
able personal ugliness, and very quarrelsome and litigious. They are
great cultivators of the melon, and when ripe they subsist almost
entirely upon it, even cooking and eating the seeds.
Manyák, a branch of the Niázi Patháns.
Mainí, a caste of Khatrís; a common weed (Trigonella polyserrata).
MAIR. (1) The people along the right bank of the Indus in the cantons of
Bunker, Daher, Pattan, Seo and Kandia of the Indus Kohistán: so called
by the Patháns, but styling themselves Maiyon. The poorest of all thg
Kohistán communities, they speak a dialect of their own and refuse to
intermarry with any but their own people and those of one or two
other cantons. Biddulph, Tribes of the Hindoo Roosh, p. 12.
(2) One of the three chief tribes in the Chakwal tahsil of Jhelum of
which with the Kassars and Kahúts they hold the greater part; their
share being most of its centre with outliers to the west, south-west,
and south: they hold hardly any land elsewhere. Their story used to
be that they came from the Jammu hills, joined Babar's army, and
were located by him in Chakwal; and so Sir Denzil Ibbetson
thought :-"They most probably belong to the group of Rajput or
quasz-Rájput tribes, who hold the hills on either bank of the Jhelum."
But now they give the following account of themselves :- Máir, they
say, was one of their remote ancestors; they are really Minhas
Rájputs (Minhas being a word denoting agricultural pursuits, applied
to Rajputs who took to agriculture) and that they are Dográs like the
Mabárájás of Kashmír.* In proof of their kinship to that family
they assert that when their misconduct in 1848 led to the con-
fiscation of their jágírs, they sent a deputation to Guláb Singh to
ask him to intercede for them: and that admitting their hereditary
connection with his family, he offered to give them villages in his own
estate, if they wished to settle there. Their ancestors originally lived
at a place called Parayág, or Parguwál,t about 8 miles west of Jammu
* This is confirmed by the Rajputs of the country round Jammu, who say that an offshoot
of the Surajbansi Rájputs was a clan now called Minhas, who degraded themselves by
taking to agriculture and are therefore cut off from the privileges of Rájputs.
+ Pargwal, a large village in the Akhnúr tahsil some 26 miles west of Jammu, is ono
of the principal Minhás centres in Kasbmír.



The Mairs.
55
in the hills and were descended from Pargu Rájá who gave his name
to that place. The Dhanni country was then part of the Dográ
kingdom and was given to their forefather, Bhagiár Dev, as his share
of the ancestral estates : be went there with his following, some time
before the advent of Bábar, to found new colonies. The country was
then occupied by wandering Gujar graziers, who were ejected by the
Máirs, but not before their leader Bhagiár Dev had fallen in love with a
Gujar woman, and through her influence had become a convert to Islám.
(The pedigree table does not bear this out.) With them from Jammu
came their priests, the Brahmans now called HACLE.
The first settlement of the Máirs in the Dhanni was at a spot in
Chak Bázid near Chakwal which was not far from the great lake which
then covered all the eastern part of the tahsil, up to the ridge followed
by the Bhon-Dhundhiál road. When Bábar came he cut through the
Ghori Gala, by wbich the Bunha torrent now escapes through the hills
of the Salt Range and drained the country, which the Máirs proceeded
to take up.
The.Máirs deny that the Chakwal tahsil ever formed part of the
dominions of the Janjúas, except the Mahál tract, which was taken by
one of their chiefs from the Janjúas: and they assert that, so far from
ever having been subject to the Janjúas, they themselves once beld a
great part of the Janjúa territory, as far as the Pind Dadan Khán
plains.
The tribe is not divided into clans, though sometimes the descend-
ants of a particular man are known by his name. In religion they are
Sannis, with a small proportion of Shiás: as regards places of re-
verence, customs, etc., they have no peculiarity, unless it be that
amongst some of the most prominent tribes marriages are performed
with a show of secrecy at night: but this is said to be merely in order
to avoid the exactions of the crowd of Mirásis which at one time be-
came intolerable. The Chaudhris of the village Kot Khilán cannot give
their daughters in marriage without obtaining the nominal permission
of certain Jo Játs, residents in their village, to whom they also pay
marriage fees; this is said to be a privilege granted to the ancestor of
these Játs by a Chaudhri long ago, for murdering a rival chief.
The Máirs intermarry with the Kassars, and to a less extent with
the Kahúts: some of them deny that daughters are given to Kahúts, or
if of pure descent, even to Kassars, but there are instances to the
contrary. They also intermarry to some extent with A wáns and with
the Jolidrás of Pindi Gheb. They do not give daughters in marriage
to Sayyids, and of course cannot marry Sayyid girls themselves, they
take girls from certain Gondal villages in Shahpur. Usually, however,
marriage is within the tribe. In good families the remarriage, of
widows is not permitted ; a generation ago a widow in one of the prin-
cipal families was killed by her father on the suspicion that she contem-
plated remarriage. Amongst ordinary Máirs, however, widows are
allowed to remarry; but they are under no obligation to marry their
deceased husband's brother; and generally marry elsewhere.
The claims of the Máirs to Rájput descent seem to rest on a more
reasonable foundation tban is generally the case : but as usual no



Maire-Malak.
certain conclusion can be arrived at. They trace their descent back
to a Rattan Dev, son of Bhagiár Der, through Lavá and Jaitshi. Lavá
had two sons, Megha and Saghar Khan. Their pedigree gives about
23 generations back to Bhagiár Dev.
MAIRI, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
MAJÁWAR, see Mujáwar.
MAJBí, Majhabí, fem. .AN: see Mazhabí.
MAJHERU, a sept of Kanets descended from Mián Mithu, younger brother
and wazir of Narindar Chand, 23rd Rája of Kahlur.
MAJHIÁNA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery
and Shahpur.
Majíthíá, from majíth, the root of the Rubia munjista or madder..
MAJJhail, see Manjhail.
MAJOKA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
MAJWÁTHA, a clan of the Silhúria or Saleria Rájputs.
Maszúb, see Azád.
MAKHDÚM (ÁNÁ), lit. ' a lord, a master, one who is served,' opposed to khádim :
the head of a Mubaramadan shrine, generally a descendant of the saint
who founded it. The Makhdúm is hardly the priest of the shrine
though he presides over its management. Strictly speaking, the title
should only be applied to the beads of leading shrines, but in recent
times it has been assumed by the incumbents of many smaller ones as
well as by the cadets of the families who hold important shrines. The
Makhdúms are all Sayyid or Quraish or claim such descent.
Maraníá, a butterman.
MAKKAL, a tribe found in small numbers throughout the Baháwalpur State.
Blacksmiths by trade, they say they migrated from Mecca to Sind in
the 1st century of the Hijra.
MAKOL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Makomá, a Jat clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Mál, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MAL, & Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MALán, see Malláh.
MALAK, MALIK. A camel-keeper or driver; a term applied in Lahore, where
all camelmen are called Baloch, to any camelman : (2) a title of Khatrís :
(3) a class of Muhammadans :(4) a title of the GAATWÁL Játs who claim
to be descended from Siroha Rajputs, and to have come from Garh
Ghazni in the Deccan. The Maliks of Khanpur Kalán in Rohtak and
the Panipat tahsil still call themselves Siroha Játs. Where Garb Gbazni
was, exactly, they are unable to say.. Ahulána, the metroplis, was
founded 22 generations ago, and from it, and some other villages settled
at the same time, the central Maliks have spread. Those on the east
border of the tahsil have, as a rule, sprung" from estates in Panipat,



Malán-Málí.
57
where this clan is well represented also; Gándhrá and Dáboda, two
villages in' Sámpla tahsil, were founded from Ahulana, and from
Gándhra Atai; Karor was founded from Ganwri and from Karor,
Kahrawar. It is curious to note how emigrations of the same olan,
though coming from two separate estates, settled close together in a
now tahsil.
Malán, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MALANA, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Malána, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MALANHÁNs, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MALANG, a non-descript sect said to be the followers of one Jaman Jatti,
who in turn was a follower of Zinda Shah Madár, so that the Malangs
are commonly looked on as a branch of the Madárís. But the term is
generally applied in a more general way to any' unattached religious
beggar, who drinks bhang or smokes charas in excess, wears nothing
but a loin cloth, and keeps fire always near him. The Malangs are
said to wear their hair very long, or matted and tied into a knot
behind, The shrine of Jhangí Shah, Kháki, in the Pasrúr tabsil of
Sialkot is frequented by Malangs. They are both Hindu and Muham-
madans by religion.
MALBAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Malaí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. See also under Mullhi.
MALHOTRA, MARHOTRA, a section of the Kaatrís.
Málí, fem. -AN. The term Máli, the málákúra or 'maker of garlands' of the
Puránas, is applied to a large class of petty cultivators and gardeners.
· Strictly speaking, the term is confined to the Hindus, a Muhammadan
gardener being known as Kunjra, in the south-eastern Districts, ormore
commonly, as Aráin, * or Bághbán, the latter a pure Persian word, mean:
ing gardener, which is mainly used in the western Districts. Maliár
is the equivalent of Ardín in the western Districts. Several derivations
of the word Máli are given, + but there can be no doubt that it is the
Sanskr, málákár one who makes málás or garlands.' In Bashahr the
máli is a temple servant, corresponding to the dewa of the other Simla
Hill States, but it can only be conjectured that his name is derived
from málá, & chaplet or garland. Primitive sacerdotalism, in its ene
deavoars to explain the origins of different callings, makes the Mali an
agnate of the Kumhár, for, according to the Baran Babek Chanderka,
the Mális like the superior castes derive their origin from Brahma the
first deity of the Hindu Triad. They trace their descent from one
Málákár, son of Vishwakarma and grandson of Brahma. Vishwakarma
married one Parbhauti, daughter of a gop named Man Math, and had
by her six sons—(1) Málákár, (2) Karankár, (3) Sankokár, (4) Kubandak,
maslakar, Woof the Hinperior cascording to
* Folk etymology derives Aráín from rai, 'mustard,' because the Muhammadan converts
woro liko a grain of mustard in a heap of (Hindús) corn.
† 1.g. in Gurgaon inal is said to mean' a crop of vegetables.'



The Mális.
(5) Kumbhkár, and (6) Kanskár. The descendants of the Málákár
undertook the profession of gardening and flower-growing *
The Hindu Málís have numerous groups, of which the following are
described :-
1. Phúl.
5. Machhi.
2. Goha or Nápá-bansi.
6. Dhankata or Jadaun.
3. Saini.
7. Tanboli.
4. Kachhi,
8. Kambob.
The Jind account divides the Hindu Málís into two main groups,
each of which has several khánps or sub-groups, which are not now
endogamous,t thus :-
1. Phát
2. Máhar.I
Group I, ujjal baran ke Máli, or superior,
Gola.t
Bhagirathi.§
which eschews the use of flesh.
Suraj.bansi.:
Saine or Sení.
Not found in
Bbaine, found in Karnál. Jind.
Kachhwái.
Group II, niche baran ke, inferior or
flesh-eating, immigrants from
Sikas Kanchhí.
we 3. Kachhí.
the **
eastward.
(4. Machhí.
This latter group practises karewa, and avoids four gots in marriage.
The Phúl Mális dispute the Gola group's superiority within the caste.
They avoid eating meat, and advance as a proof that they used not to
practise widow marriage the fact that their women's Doses are bored.
In Hissár they are said to be divided into two sub-castes() the Dheria
who used to ply carts (from dhurá, axle), and (ii) the Gauſia, who used
to make gur. Each of these sub-castes avoids three gots in marriage,
eats flesh and practises karewa.
The Golas dispute the superiority claimed by the Phúl Málís, and
have certain distinctive customs ; e. g., their women wear no nose-
ring, and the widow of a younger brother cannot contract marriage
with his elder Four gots are avoided in marriage, but it is not clear
whether the group is endogamous or not, since one account asserts that
the Phúl and Gola are in reality one and the same group. Another
account gives the gots of the Gola as the same as those of the Phúl, in
Rohtak.** Again the Golas are said to be descended from a Tur Rajput
who took a Málan to wife, and his children by her were named golas.
* From the Brahma Vaivarta Purana it appears that Vishwakarmá, the architect of the
gods, incarnated himself on earth in a Brabman's house and that Ghritachi, a celestial nymph,
was born on account of a curse uttered by Vishwakarmá, in the house of Madau, a gop in
Prayag. Ghritachi in the form of a gop girl was engaged in austerities on the bank of
Ganges and was there met by Vishwakarmá in the form of Brahma. They fall in love and
to them were born nine children. The eldest was named Málákár, and to him the Mális
trace thoir origin. As to their gots their names are derived from those of each class of
Mális. Four gots on each side are avoided in marriage.
+ Thus Phúl and Mábar intermarry in Dádri tahsil, Phúl and Gola in Jind tahsil, and
80 on.
I Apparently the Málar stand highest, next to them the Phúl, and after them the Gola,
Some Mális derive Mahar from mor, pollen.'
From the Bhagirathi, a tributary of the Ganges. In Karnál they appear to be also
called Bhagirni, and form a sub-caste.
II Because they served Suraj-bansi Rájputs.
T From Sain, a village in Brij. In Karnál the Siáni (sic) group is said to be also
called Bhaini or Bhagirathi.
** In Hissár it is suggestad that Gola = Gwála, because this group roared cattle.



Máli groups.
59
As descendants of Nápá the Golas are often termed Nápá-bansí.
The Golas are found in Hariána, Hissar and Rohtak, in the Punjab
and to the south of those Districts beyond its borders. They are also
found in Sirmúr, where they are said to be descendants of the gola or
slave of Rájá Sagar, a Kshattriya.
In the eastern tracts of Jind a territorial group, the Bágri, is found.
It comprises only three gots--Gharánia, Gharno, and Kainthlí Kapúr.
The Kachhis form an occupational group of the Málís, so called be-
cause they used to sell vegetables in the kachheri or chhihſa, a kind of
basket. They were also vendors of boiled water-nuts (singhára). They
eat flesh and their women wear the nose-ring. I'wo gots only are
avoided in marriage.
The Máchbís, in Gurgaon and Hissár, live by fishing. In Ludhiana
the Máchhís and Kachhis sell pattals and dunas for Hindu weddings.
In Kángra the Malís have four gots Chauhán, Karol, Pathuk-of
the Konsal gotra, -and Sindhuwal, which all intermarry.
The following song, sung by Hindu women at weddings, assumes an
origin of some antiquity for the Málís :-
Dilli shahr se nikli,
Bágán de bich de,
Rájá Rám Chandr kí Málane,
Bágán de bich bich áeke,
Kali kali chug láe,
Rájá Rám Chandr kí Málane,
Kali kali chug láeke
Sahirâ gúnd lá,
Rájá Rám Chandr ki Málane.
Coming from Delhi city,
Passing thro' the gardens .
() Málan of Rám Chandr !
Picking buds off the flowers,
Make a garland and bring it.'
But the earliest mention of the Malákárs appears to be in Manú.*
During the Hindu period they used to bring garlands at the Swambar
yuga.
The cults of the Hindu Mális.
The vults of the Hindu Mális, as a body, are not very distinctive.t
In Gurgaon they chiefly affect the goddess and Bhairon, while some
offer halwa to Shiámji on the 12th sudi of each month. In Higeár
Hanumán is worshipped as well as Bhairon. In Kángra the devi of the
Málís is called Bajúsri, and they offer wreaths to her.
In Jind the Mali is often a bhagat or votary of Goga, keeps an iron
chain on his shoulders at Guga's festivals, and receives offerings made
to that hero. And in that State the Tower group or flesh-eating ?)
• Manu Smriti, Ch. VII, pp. 46-7.
† In Gurgaon the Mális are often employed in Baráogi temples.



60
Muhammadan Mális.
Málís adopt Brahmans or Bairagis as their gurús, receiving in return
beads (kanthis) or the janeo at their hands. Certain groups too affect
particular divinities. Thus the Máhars affect Devi, and Hanúmán,
son of Anjani, one of Rám Chandra's messengers. The Phúls affect
Shámji (Sri Krishna). In Sangrúr some of the Málís are Sikhs of
Gurú Govind.
Myths have clustered round the Málí caste. When Rám Chandra
wedded Rája Janak's daughter the following quatrain was sung :
Ghar ghar mangal, ghar ghar shadi. :
Ghar ghar har jas gawáne,
Gúnd liyáí Málan phúlon ka sihrá,
Βάm Lachhman φαι ρανάne.
In every house are festivities and rejoicings in every house are.
How good of the Mali's wife to bring garlands of flowers to put
on the necks of Rám and Lachhman.'
So too Kubjá* or Kabiri, Málan, used to offer garlands of flowers to
Krishna and his queens.
The saints of the Muhammadan Mális.
Mahbub was a famous saint of Baghdad, and he had a favourite Aráin
disciple named Mahmúd, to whom he assigned gardening as a vocation.
Accordingly when about to plant a sapling or to make a disciple the
Mális distribute sweets in his name, and when in any difficulty they
repeat his name. Before planting a new garden they also say:
Bismillah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim,
Bagh lagáya Panj.tan, máli bhae Rasúl,
Cháre yár, chóre chaman,
Hazrat Imám Hasan wa Husain do phúl,
Ba-haqq-i-La Ilaha il-Alláh-u-Muhammad.ur.Rasúl-Alláh.
In the name of God the most merciful,
The Panj-tan have planted a garden, of which the Prophet became
the gardener,
The four companions were as many gardens,
Hazrat Iinám Hasan and Husain were two flowers.
In truth there is none worthy of worship save God, and Muhammad
is his Prophet.
The Mális also revere Khwaja Khizr, the Melchisedec of the Old
Testament.
Caste Administration.
The Málís in the south-east of the Punjab have a well-organised
system of panchayats, with hereditary chaudhrís. In Delhi tbe
chaudhri is called bádshah, and the chaudhrís from Gohána, Maham,
Kharkhauda, Bahadurgarh and Jhajjar join his panchayat. † In Karnai
the chauntras are at Panipat and Karnál itself. In Jind the chaudhri
represents the village at the chauntra (Múnak in Pațiála) where the
chaudhrís assemble to decide disputes. In the western Districts the
system does not exist.
* She is mentioned in the Mahábhárata.
† In Jhajjar eight chaudhris are said to be subordinate to a chauntra,



Máli occupation.
61
The pancháyats have decided many points of customary law, e.g.,
when à Máli widow declined to marry her husband's younger
brother, in defiance of caste custom, it was decided that if she
did not do so, she must live in the family and earn her own living
by labour, or else be excommunicated. In Kharkhauda the pancháyat
has decided that the caste of Málís shall not supply water to
people under penalty of a fine. A Máli who repudiated his first
wife and married another was mulcted in a penalty of Rs. 27 and
compelled to maintain his first wife. Máli women used to wear the
pose-ring, but once a widow resolved to burn herself on her husband's
pyre, and before doing so she took off all her ornaments except
her nose-ring, declaring that any wifa like her would remain for
ever a wife, since she had taken with her the nose-ring, the token
of her sohág, and that if any wife of the tribe wonld love her husband
like her she must wear Do pose-ring. Since then the custom of
wearing the nose-ring has become extinct. About 60 years ago a
Máli of Delhi attempted to revive the custom and he had a nose-ring
worth Rs. 70 made, with rings of less value worth Rs. 300 or Rs. 400.
He gave the most valuable ring to his wife by karewa, but the pan-
cháyat decided that as karewa was permissible there was no need for
wives to wear nose-rings. So the ring was given to a barber's wife.
Occupation.
By occupation the Máli or Araín, whether Hindu or Muhammadan,
whatever his name or creed may be, is essentially a petty cultivator,
sometimes rising to the status of a Ját, as do the Saidis in Hoshiár-
pur, sometimes sinking to the lower occupations of selling flowers,
vegetables, and leaf-platters, or even to drawing water. At Hindu
weddings, the Hindu Mali's function is to supply the garland and
chaplet (sihra) of flowers worn on the forehead under the maur or
crown by the bridegroom. The fee paid for this is Re, 1-4. The Máli
women often do the same work as the meg.
In Máler Kotla the Muhammadan Aráiņs are termed Bághbán, and
some are employed as gardeners, others as cultivators: the latter are
called Gáchhi.
In Jind the Rains or Bághbáns claim descent from Rai Jáj, grandson
of Láwá, founder of Lahore, and say they were converted to Islám in
the 13th century A. D. În Sangrúr tahsil the Aráíņs claim descent
from Jassa, brother of Shaikha and Sinhún, sons of Sadhárí, a Rájput
of Delhi. Jassa embraced Islám and his descendants are called Ráín or
Máhar.
The Bunjrás are sabzi-farosh or green-grocers, and are divided into
several sub-castes of which two, the Karal and Chauhan, are found in
Jind. The Karal claim descent from Sársut Brahmans and at their
weddings they still observe the phera, light a fire and put on the janeo
before the Muhammadan nikáh is celebrated. The Chauhan of course
claim Rájput origin.
In Hissør the Sainis are said to be an offshoot of the Gola sub-caste,
but in Karnál they form a separate sub-caste.
MALIÁR, (1) an agricultural clan found in Shabpur ; (2) see ander Máli,
of Dellassa, bnry A. Dahore,



62
Maliarum Malláh.
Malióro, a sept of Kanets, descended from the third son of Rájá Amar
Chand of Kahlúr (Bilaspur), who sank from Rájput status by marrying
a peasant bride. Another account makes them descendants of a son of
Tegh Chand, 3rd son of Rájá Káhn Chand of Kahlúr. The sept is
found mainly in Hindúr (Nálágarh) but also in Kahlúr.
MALIK-DÍN, a section of the Afrídis numerous in lower Miránzai, in Kohát,
in colonies brought down by retired officers of that tribe from the hills.
MALIKI, one of the four great schools of doctrine of the Sunni Muhammad-
ans. Described by Mr. Maclagan as “ very rare in India, and generally
supposed to be almost confined to Barbary and the adjacent tracts
in North Africa. The figures in our returns can be looked on as
no sort of guide, but from the appearance of the term Maliki Balmíki'
in conjunction it seems probable that the sect may have some attraction
for the lower class of Mussalmán. This school was founded by
Malik-ibn-Anas (A. D 716-795), and it is remarkable for its strict
adherence to the letter of the traditions and its complete supersession
of private judgment.”
MALIKSHÁHI, see under Utmánzai.
MALKA, (1) a Kharral clan ; (2) a Muhammadan Ját clan (both agricultural)
found in Montgomery.
MALKIÁR, à section of the Taríns, settled in the Haripur plain of Hazára,
They claim to be descendants of Malik Yár, a brother of Tor and
Spín, but the Tor Taríns say they belong to a subsidiary branch.
MALKOTIA, a sept of Rájputs, of the 2nd grade of the Jaikária : found in
Hoshiarpur.
MALLÁH.--The Mallsh is the boatman of the Punjab, and is naturally found
in largest numbers in those Districts which include the greatest length
of navigable river. On the Indus he is often regarded by himself and
others as a Ját, and in Amritsar where all boatmen are called mailáhs,
the Malláh are said to have been originally Játs. In this District they
have several clans,* own 12 villages in proprietary right, make
nets and baskets and are all Muhammadans.' Elsewhere he is doubt-
less almost invariably a Jhínwar by caste, and very generally a
Musalmán by religion, but in Sirsa Niost of the Malláhs on the Sutlej
are by caste JAABEL. He generally combines with his special work of
boat management some other of the ordinary occupations of his caste,
such as fishing or growing water-nuts, but he is not a village menial.
In Karnal the Malláh claim to be strictly endogamous, and apparently
do not intermarry with the Jhínwar. In Gurgáon the Malláh is also
called DAINWAR and is found on the Jumna. Generally a boatman he
is also addicted to petto crime and will go long distances on thieving
expeditions. Under the head Malláh may be included the Moháda,
Tárut or Dren. The Mohána is said to be the fisherman of Sindh, but
in the Punjab he is at least as much a boatman as a fisherman. The
word in Sanskrit means an estuary or confluence of waters. lo
* In Kapurthala the following are said to be gots of the Malláhs :- Kakori, Antári, Elwe,
Dáte, Pardáthi, Kothpál, Jind, Ajri, Thábal and Gantal,
| Téry means simply swimmer' or 'ferryman.' The same root appears in Tarp
Tiran.



lour the JHABELS, M men and the makes Jhabels are agriman
Mallhi-Malod.
63
Baháwalpur the JHABELS, Mohánas, and MALLÁos are said to form one
tribe, the mohanas or fishermen and the malláhs or boatmen forming
occupational groups within the tribe, while the Jhabels are agriculturists,
owning a certain amount of land. The Mohápas claim to be “Mahesar"
Rájputs and have 9 septs :-
Ichhchhe, of whom some are agriculturists, and others boatmen.
Manchhari, who are boatmen and fishermen.
Balhárá.
Niháyá.
Khaurá.
Hír.
Hussro.
Kat-Bál, some of whom pretend to be Daudpotras and Sirre.
The Dren and Táru are only found in the hills, where they carry
travellers across the rapid mountain streams on inflated hides. The
former are said to be Musalmán and the latter Hindu.
The term dren is derived from a word meaning an inflated skin,
buffalo hide, upon which the transit is made. In the Hill States Daryái
is also used for Dren. Broadly speaking, it may perhaps be said that
the Jhínwar and Máchbi follow their avocations on land and the Malláh
and Mohána on water, all belonging to the same caste, but sometimes
the Dren are said to be really Chamárs and of the same status as the
Sarera.
MALLHI, a Ját tribe, found in Siálkot and Jind. In the latter State it
has Didár Singh for its sidh like the Kaler. In Sialkot the Mallhi
claim Saroha Rajput descent and say their eponym migrated into the
Punjab with his seven sons as herdsmon. These seven sons founded as
many muhins. They led a pastoral life for three generations and then
Milambar, 4th in descent from Mallhi, founded Achrak near Kasúr. *
Their customs are those of the Goráyas, and they have as their
Brahmans the Hanotras, as mirásis the Kuchars, and as náis the
Ruspains. In succession the role of chundávand, per stirpes, is said to
be followed. There are also strong colonies in Amritsar and Gujranwálá.
In the latter District, Narang, son of Varsi, settled in Humayun's time
and his son Rám married a Wirk maiden receiving her land in dower.
The custom of pagvand also obtains in this District, and adoption
within the clan is common,
MALLANE, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Mallí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar, and also in Ludhiána.
Its ancestor Tilak Rái has a mári at Pabbian in the Jagraon tahsil of
the latter District, and there is held an annual fair, at which offerings
are given to Brahmans ana their chelas, on the Amáwas of Chet. At
weddings the pair worship at the mari. In Sialkot the Malli are said
to have seven muhins, but they may be confused with the Mallhi.
MALOD, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
*The Sialkot pamphlet of 1863 says the Malli (sic) are Soma-Vunsi, claiming descent
from Rájá Suroa, King of Delhi. One “Mulleh ” a descendant came from Delhi, who with
his son led a pastoral life for 3 generations, after which they settled at Nebra near Kasúr
whence some emigrated here. They have seveu movrs and intermarry with Onima and
Varáich.



64
Malwas-Mán.
Malwsí, fem. -AIN, AIN, an inhabitant of the Málwa, south of the Sutloj, es
opposed to MAJJA!L.
MAMAND, a Pațháu clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Mamar, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MAMARHÁ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Mámázal, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MAMBAR, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Mamdána, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MAMERA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Mamná, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MAMRA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Mamraí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in.Amritsar.
MAMUNKHEL, an agricultaral clan found in Sháhpur.
Mán, a widespread Ját tribe which is usually said to be asli or original
Ját, like the Bhúlar and Her. But they also claim Rájput descent.
Thus the Mán, Dullál and Deswál Játs all claim descent from Dhanna
Rao of Silantha in Rohtak by a Badgujar Rájput wife and so these
three tribes are said not to intermarry, * but the Mán also claim descent
from a Punwár Rájput of Garh Gajni who settled in Patiala in the time
of the famous Bani Pál of Bhatinda, and yet a third tradition makes
thern descendants of Bani Pál himself.f Râjá Binepál, as they call
hini, was the last ruler of Ghazni and he led an expedition into India,
founded Bhatinda, driving out the Bhattis, and became the progenitor
of the Mán and other tribes. One famous Mán was Bhundar Khán'
and his son Mirza Khán obtained that title from one of the emperors
who also gave another Mán the title of Sháh. His descendants form
the Mánsháhia muhin of the Máns. Sindhu, they also say, was one of
the 12 sons of Mán.
The Man hold a búrah or group of 12 villages in Hoshiarpur. In
Sialkot, it is said, the Deo will not intermarry with the Mán as tradition
says their ancestor forbade them to have any dealings with them.
It is said that Thákur Rájputs of the Mán tribe are still to be found
in Jaipur. Several of the leading Sikh families belong to this tribe, and
their history will be found in Sir Lepel Griffin's Panjab Chiefs. That
writer states that there is “a popular tradition in the Punjab which
makes all of the Mán tribe brave and true.” The home of the Mán is in
the northern Málwa, to the east of that of the Bhúlar; but they are
found in every District and State of the Punjab east of Lahore, especi-
ally in the northern Districts and along the Sutlej. And from the fact
that the Man of Jullundur and of Karnál also trace their origin to the
neighbourhood of Bhatinda, it would appear probable that there was
the original home of the tribe. In Jind they have a jathera, Bábá
Bola, at Cháo, and to him offerings are made at weddings and on the
Diwali.
there is
a pol and true of the Bhúl of Lahore, the fact
* Another tradition makes their ancestor a Ráthor Rajput and adds the Sewag to his
descendants.
+ This would give the Mán the same Rajput ancestry as the Varyá. Baní Pál had 4
sons, Pargá, Sándar, Khálá and Maur of whom the firet settled in Nábha.



Manchhari-Mandal.
:
65
MANCHAARI, a fisherman (M.): said to be a sept of the Jhabels or Mohánas,
but see Manchhera.
MANCHHERA. ---As the name denotes, a tribe of fishermen. Apparently
confined to the Indus near Bhakkar, they are orthodox Sunni Muham.
madans with a few distinctive customs. Thus they avoid weddings in
Kátak-as well as during the Muharram. Dower is fixed by custom
at not less than 100 copper coins and a gold mohar. Sometimes when
a bride reaches her father-in-law's house for the first time she sits on
the threshold and exacts 2 or 3 rupees before she will enter it. A
bride returns to her parents' home after a week, staying there a week,
and returning to her husband's on the 8th day, with a quantity of
parched grain for distribution among her relations-in-law. On a death
the corpse is washed and a coffin made by a mulláh. If the members
of the brotherhood be present they each place a shroud 3} cubits long
on the corpse, which is then laid on a chárpái and carried to the
graveyard.
Mand, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Multán: also in Jind
in which State they offer at weddings 14 man of sweet porridge with
halwá to and light a lamp on the samádh of their sidh, who appears to
be their jathera.
MANDAHÁR, a tribe of Rájputs, holding a compact block in Kaithal, with a
chaudhriát at Şiwan, and almost confined to the Nardak of Karnal,
Ambála and the neighbouring portion of Patiala. They are said to
have come from Ajudhia to Jind driving the Chanacl and Baráh Rájputs
who occupied the tract into the Siwaliks and across the Ghaggar
respectively. They then fixed their capital at Kalayat in Pațiála,
with minor centres at Safídon in Jind and Asandh in Karnál.
They lie more or less between the Túnwar and Chauhan of the
tract. But they have in more recent times spread down below the
Chauhan into the Jumna riverain of Karnál, with Gharaunda as
a local centre. They were settled in these parts before the advent
of the Chauhan, and were chastised at Samána, now in Pațiála,
by Firoz Shah who carried off their Ránás to Dalhi, and made
many of them Musalmans. The Safídon brauch obtained the villages
now held by them in the Nardak in comparatively late times by
intermarriage with the Chaubáns. And though they expelled the
Chan lel Rájputs from Kohand and Gharaunda when they first came
into those parts of Karnál, yet the Chandels reconquered them, and the
final occupation by the Mandhárs coming direct from Kalayat, now in
Pațiála, is possibly of comparatively recent date. The Mandahár,
Kandahár, Bargujar, Sankarwal, and Panihár Rájputs are said to be
descended from Lawa, a son of Rám Chandra, and therefore to be
Solar Rájputs; and in Karnál at least they do not intermarry. A few
Mandahár are found east of the Jumna in Saharanpur, but the tribe
appears to be very local.
MANDAL, MARHAL, a tribe which originally came from Sámána in Iatiala
and is now found in Karnál. It acquired the name of Maţial, Marhal*
* Wynyard's Ambála Sett. Rep., p. 33. Maſhi is a tomb or shrine. See also under
Maral.



66
Mandan-Mangar.
or Mandbal from its ancestor who was found newly born by his dead
mother's side. The Karnál Gazetteer says :-
"The Mandals, or as they are sometimes called Marhals, are said to be a family of Múla
Játs, or Játs who have been converted to Islám. They generally call theraselves Patháns,
and they affect the Pathán affix of Khán to their names. They also sometimes assert that
they are of Rájput descent, and the poor Musalman Rájputs occasionally marry their
daughters to them, but under no circumstances would a Rájput marry a Mandal woman,
and the latter marry only within the family, which being very limited in numbers, many
of the girls remain unmarried.'
MaŅpan, an Aráín clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Montgomery.
MANDANR, MANDAR, (1) the branch of the Yosufzai Patháns which holds the
Peshawar plain north of the Kábul river, called British Yusufzai, the
Chamla valley on the Pesbáwar border, and part of the Haripur tract
in Hazára : (2) a Dcgar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Mandi, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Montgomery.
Mandíal, an inhabitant of Maņņí State or its capital : see also MIAN.
MANDU KHEL, one of the oldest branches of the Pathans, but never very
numerous, and descended from Mando, son of Ismail alias Ghorghasht.
They have hardly migrated from their original seat in the upper or
north-eastern part of the Zhob valley, near the junction of that river
with the Gomal. Quiet and inoffensive they are devoted to agriculture,
growing rice and other grains : but some follow a pastoral life. They
have their kinsmen, the Músá Khel Pannis and Kákars on their south and
west, the Wazírs on their north and the Harpail Sherannis on their east.
MANDYE, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar..
Mánes, a tribe, mainly Muhammadan, of Ját status, found chiefly along the
Deg streain in Montgomery. Some are Hindus or Sikhs. They claim
to be Rajputs, descendants of Mánes, grandson of Salvában Rája of
Sialkot, but their legends involve a war between him and the Moslems
of Mecca ! They appear to be racially connected with the Bhattis and
Wațţus. They grow most of the rice raised in the Gugera tabsíl.
MÁNG, MANG, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multan and Amritsar.
MANGAI, a Muhammadạp Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
MANGAL. (1) a Pathán tribe, expelled from Bannú by the Bannúchi,
Apparently now called Mangali: (2) Also a KaNET sept.
MANGAL KEEL, a Pathán tribe of Upper Bangash (Kurram), said by Raverty
to be distinct from the Mangali
MANGALI, a branch of the Karláni Pathans. It is divided into three tribes
Mughal, Jadran and Babádurzai, all found in Kurram along the
borders of Khost on the north, west and south. It also includes
a clan called the Mangal Khel. Towards the close of the 13th century.
or perhaps 50 years earlier, the Mangal and the Hanbi, an affiliated
tribe of Sayyid origin, left their seats in Birmil, crossed the Sulaimáns
into Bannu and settled in the Kurram and Gambíla valleys. Abont a
century later the Bannúchi druve both tribes back into the mountains of
Kohát and Kurram whero thoy still dwell.
MANGAN, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery an
Multán.
MANCAR, an old tribe of the Jhang Bár.
uts, descerends invol racially conne



Mangat-Manhás.
67
MANGAȚ, a Ját clan (agricultural). found in Amritsar, and also found in
Ludhiana and the adjoining portion of Pațiála.
MANGATH, a tribe of Játs.
MANGERA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
Mandíáná, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
MANGLá, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
MANHás, a tribe of Rajputs, found in large numbers throughout the
country below the Jammu border, i.e. in Ráwalpindi, Jhelum, Sialkot,
Gurdáspur, etc. They claim Solar origin by direct descent from Rám
Chandar, whose descendant Ukalghar (Akálghar) took up his abode in
the Doáb (Sialkot). His son Jamú Láchan became famous, defeated
Chandar Hans, Rájá of the Madra Des, and built the modern city
of Jammu. The present ruling family of Kashmír are his lineal
descendants and owe their family name of Jamwal to him. One of
this royal, race, named Malan Hans took to the plough and lost status,
so that his descendants have been disparagingly termed Manhas ever
since.* Traditions as to the migrations of the Manhás vary. They
say their ancestor came from Ajudhia, but some ayer that they settled
in Sialkot before they conquered Jammui, while others say they went
first to Kashmir, then to Siálkot and then to Jammu. All seem agreed
that they moved into Jammu from the plains. It is probably safest to
regard the Jamwal as the territorial title of the ruling family or clan
of the Manhás tribe, rather than to hold 'Jamwal' to have been the
old name of the whole tribe, but now conốned to the royal branch who
do not engage in agriculture and so look down upon their cultivating
brethren the Manhás. They give daughters to the Salahria, .but are
said not to obtain brides in return. They intermarry, apparently on
equal terms, with the Chumbal' (Chambiál), Goolaria' (? Goleria),
•Cbaruk, Bagul and Bugwal' Rájputs. They are said to call their eldest
son Rájá, and the younger ones Míán, but this probably only applies to
the ruling, or at most, principal families. Chundavand is said to be
the universal rule of inheritance.
Like the Baju and Salahria Rájputs the Manbás of tahsils Sialkot and
Zafarwal have a curious and apparently unique custom of legitimiz-
ation. If a man leave a natural son by a woman whom he might have
married, he succeeds equally with the legitimate sons, provided the
deceased's brother marries her, in which event she is called a dhuál
(Panjábi udhál). But if he do not marry her sbe is called a bothal (the
term for a widow who has remarried) and her son a chhatrora, and he
then is only entitled to 5 per cent. of his father's land and 5 marlas for
a building site.t.
Houses of burnt brick are avoided. The Manhás are for the most
part Hindus, at least in the cis-Jhelum tract. They pour water on a
goat's head at mukhláwa, and consider that his shaking his head in
consequence is pleasing to their ancestors. Some of the Manhás
* The Mahton claim a very similar origin. The Mairs claim to be an off-shoot of the
Manhás.
of History of Siálkot, p. 73. Some villages say that the bothal only succeeds in case of
parriage. The woman however would hardly succeed in the presence of her son, the
chhatroſa, a term equivalent to the satroſa or sartora of the Simla Hills.
For the origin of this tabu see under Rájput, infra,



Maniár-Manj.
in Mahilpur* are Muhammadan. They took to weaving and were
thenceforth styled Shaikhs, but the Rájputs still visit them and address
them as bhai but do not intermarry with them. There are a few
Manhás villages in Una tahsil, Hoshiarpur, where they give their
Braholinical gotra as Bharadwáj, and adopt that name in religious
rites. Their Brahmans are Sársuts of the Khajúr Dogra group. They
have to provide dower (dihej) for daughters given in narriage to higher
septs of Rájputs, but per contra receive dowers with brides taken from
lower grades. Manhás are also found as a Rájput agricultural) tribe
in Montgomery, where they are Hindus, and in Sháhpur.
Mantár, Muniár, an occupational term. The Maniár of the eastern Districts
is a man who works in glass and sells glass bangles, generally hawking
them about the villages, as opposed to the Churígar or bangle-maker
pure and simple. But throughout the rest of the Punjab maniár is any
pedlar, maniari bechhna being the common term for the occupation of
carrying petty hardware about for sale. Thus we have Bisáti, Khoja,
Parácha, Banjára, and Maniár, all used in different parts and some of
them in the same part of the Province, for a pedlar; and the result is
that the figures have probably been mixed up in our Census returns.
MAŅst-The most widely distributed of all the sub-montane Rájputs. They
hold the south-western portion of Jullundur and the north-w-stern
portion of Ludhiána, and are to be found in all the adjoining Districts
and States. Some 5,000 Mani ALPIÁL also appear in Rawalpindi, but
whether they are of the same stock as the Manj of Ludhiána and
Jullundur is more than doubtful. The Manj say that they are Bhatti
Rajputs, descended from Raja Salváhan, father of Rája Rasálú of Sialkot,
Some 600 years ago Shaikh Cháchu and Shaikh Kilchi, two Mani
Rájputs, are said to have settled at Hatúr in the south-west of Ludhiána,
whence their descendants spread into the neighbouring country; and
the Jullundur traditions refer their conquest of the tract to the time of
Alá-ud-din Khilji. As, however, they state that Shaikh Cháchu was
converted by Makhdúm Shah Jahanian of Uch, who died in 1383 A.D.,
it would appear that if the tradition has any foundation, Alá-ud-dín
Sayyid must be meant. After the dissolution of the Delhi empire the
Manj Rais of Talwandi and Raikot ruled over a very extensive territory
south of the Sutlej, till dispossessed of it by the Ahlúwália Sikhs and
Ranjit Singh; and even earlier than this the Manj Nawabs of Kot Isa
Khán had attained considerable importance under the emperors. North
of the Satlej the Manj never succeeded in establishing a principality; but
they held a large tract of country in the south-west of the Jullundur
district about Talwan, Nakodar, and Malsián, and held much of it in
jágír under the Mughals, but were dispossessed by Tára Singh Gheba
and the Sindhánwália Sikhs. The Manj in Nábha claim to be de-
scendants of Tulsi Rám, a descendant of Banni Pal, who floursihed
under Aurangzeb, and did mach to allay the dissensions of the time. He
searned many honours by military service and held charge of the Raikot
State and a large part of the area now occupied by the Phúlkián States.
The Manj are now all Musalman, though many were still Hindu
after the time of Shaikh Cháchu. In Ferozepur they still disallow
* Apparently in Hoshiarpur.
† In the Kángļí dialect! The word manj is said to mean "in the middlo.' In the uplands
I the Manj country a firm!clayisoil is called manj: P. N. Q., I.,IS 619.



Manjhail-Marhel.
69
karewa. Their genealogists live in Patiala, as do those of the Bhatti of
Jullundur. In the din-2-Akbari the Manjare wrongly shown as Main, a
title which is said to belong properly to the Ghorewála of Ludhiana.
MANJHAIL, MAJJHAIL, an inhabitant of the Mánjhá, Panjabi Dicty., p. 723.
MANJOȚE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MANJOTHA, a Ját tribe, which claims to have come with the Baloch from
Mekrán. It is found in Sanghar tahsil of Dera Gházi Khan. Like the
Arwal it follows Baloch custom in matters of marriage, etc.
Manmáhar, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Mannan, (1) a Ját and (2) an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Mansúr, a section of the Jadúns in Hazára, where it is settled in the
Mangal tract and in and about Nawanshahr : see Gadún and Hassan zai.
MANSORKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MANTARÍ, MÁntaRí, a wizard, conjurer, Panjabi Dicty., p. 725. The term
was in use in the Simla Hills till recent times in the sense of minister or
counsellor.
MANWÁLE, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MANZAI, see under Wazír.
MAPALKE, a Muhammadau Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Maráí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
MARAL, a tribe found in Baháwalpur. Maral, its eponym, was a Chaubán
who migrated from Delhi and settled in Sindh. He had three sons,
but all their descendants are called Marals. Their mirasis give the
following folk-etymology: A certain Chauhan was told by his astro-
logers that a boy would be born in a Chauhan family who would destroy
his kingdom, so he ordered that all the children born to the Chaubáns
should be killed, but Maral's mother concealed him in a drum, and so
he was named Maral (from marhna, 'to muffle,') while the family fed
to Sindh. Cf. Mandal and Marral.
MARAL, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Mulián.
Marálí, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
MARANA, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MARAP, see Cháhzang.
MARAR, a sept of Som-bansi Rájputs found in Gujrát, whither they migrated
from Sámáva in Akbar's time. They intermarry, but also give
daughters to Sayyids and Chibhs.
Marásí, fem. -AN, see Mirásí.
Máraty, a wandering tribe of somewhat thievish propensities, found mainly
in the northern part of Multán.
Máraz, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsai.
MAĶDAK, a Kamboh clan (agricultural), found in Amritsar.
MAĶHEL, a branch of the Niázi Pațháns, descended from its eponym, one of
the eight sons of Jám.
Marael, an insignificant tribe possessing a few scattered kirris in the low
hills between the Shiráni villages and the British border in Dera Ismáil
Khán. They are employed in trading between the Kákar country



.
70
Markotra-Marwat.
and the Damán. They are like the. Pawindabs in their habits, and
move away to Afghánistán at the beginning of the hot weather.
MARHOTRA, see Malhotra.
Maríáná, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
MARJÁNA, a clan of the Siále.
MARKANDA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Markrá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MARRAL.-The Marral seem to have been once of far greater importance than ·
now in the. Jhang District, which is their home. They claim to be
Chauhán Rájpuis by origin, and to have come to the Upper Chenáb in
the time of Akbar. They are a fine bold looking set of men, but with
a bad reputation for cattle-lifting, and are poor cultivators. The
vame may be a corruption of Mașhal-see under Mandal-or they may
be identical with the Maral.
Marrar, a Ját clan found in Ludhiána. It claims descent from Sbinh
Chand who is worshipped as its jathera at weddings by the bridegroom
and bride. The offering of panjiri (gur, flour and ghi mixed together)
, and cloth is taken by a Brahman. Some of this got avoid .onions, like
most strict Hindus. Shinh Chand's shrine is at Gbarchun in Patiala
but he has mats in several villages.
MARRI, an organised Baloch tuman which holds the country beyond our
southern border; it is wholly independent, or rather uominally subject
to the Khán of Kelát, nnt being found within the Punjab. Of Rind*
origin, the Marri, who hold a large area bounded by the Khetrán
on the east, the Bugti on the south, Kachhi of Kelát on the west,
and Afghánistán on the north, are the most powerful and consequently
the most troublesome of all the Baloch tribes. They have four clans,
the Ghazáni, Loharáni, Mazáráni, and Bijáráni, of which the Mazáráni
live beyond Sibi and the Bolán and are almost independent of the tribe.
The tribe is wholly nomad and predatory.
MARULA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MARWAT, a tribe of Pathans which holds almost the whole of the Lakki
tahsil, i.e. the south-eastern half and the whole central portion of the
country between the trans-Indus Salt-range and the Wazír hills.'
The Marwat are one of the four great tribes of the Loháni Pathans.
About the beginning of the 17th century the Daulat Khel Lohánis
quarrelled with the Marwat and Mián Khel and drove them out of
Tank. The Marwat moved across the Salt-range and drove the Niázi
eastwards across the Kurram river and the Salt-range into Isá Khel on the
banks of the Indus where they found a mixed Awán and Ját population,
expelled the former and reduced the latter to servitude. Within the
50 years preceding 1880 they began to retrace their footsteps and
passed southwards over the Salt-range into Dera Ismail Khán, where
they occupy small tracts wrested from the Kundi in the northern
corner of Tánk and along the foot of the hills, and from the Blúch
Pathans in the Paniála country. Their most important clars are the
hus south, or bounded unjab. 6 sobject
About the levitha thuit moved across and the Salom
quake
The Marthe Kurrano rl Found a mixed servitude. Wsteps and
on and Jat portanto
* According to Dames, the Mazáránis are said to be of Khetrán origin, and the Loharanis
of mixed descent. Jatts, some Kalmatis, Buledhis and Hasanis have been absorbed, and
parbape some Pathán elements among the Bijáránis.



71
Marwat factions.
Músa Khol, Achu Khel, Khuda Khel,* Bahrám and Tappi. With them
are associated a few of the Niázi, who remained behind when the
main body of the tribe was expelled. The Marwat are as fine and law-
abiding body of men as are to be found on our border. They are a
simple, manly, and slow-witted people strongly attached to their
homes, good cultivators, and of pleasing appearance, being fair, tall
and muscular. Their women are not secluded, and converse readily
with strangers. Upon them however falls the labour of water-carrying,
which is by no means light. Accompanied by a man as escort they go
in troops of 10 or 20 to fetch water from the Gambíla, often & distance
of 10 or 12 miles from their village. The Khatak, their hereditary
enemies say of them : 'Keep a Marwat to look after asses ; his stomach
well-filled and his feet well-worn. About 1790 the Marwao had two
chiefs who were rivals: one Núr Khán of the Pahár Khel, a section of
the Mámu Khel sub-division: of the Khudo Khel, descended from
Sandar, son of Sálar, son of Marwat and hereditary chief of the
tribe; the other Gulrang Khán of the Háfz Khel, a man of gigantic
stature.
Nomads for the most part the Marwats possessed numerous flocks
and herds, and used to migrate from the plains to the mountains in the
hot season. They used to redistribute the lands of their villages
every 10 or 12 years, and sometimes at longer intervals, but this
redistribution was restricted within certain customary limits. Each
member of the community, however, even infants in arms, had a share
allotted to him.
Every Marwat belongs to one of the two great factions, the Spín
and Tor, quarrels between which led to the occupation of their country
by the Nawab Háfiz Abmad Khán of Mankera after the battle of
Lágharwah in 1819 when the Spín or White faction overthrew the
Black. As a body the Marwats are Patháns of very pure descent and
as such naturally proud and fiery. Their passions when once aroused
are not easily soothed, but blood-feuds are now of rare occurrence.
Two claps, the MICHAN KHEL and the MOLE KHEL, though not Marwat
by origin are also commonly known as Marwat, live in the Marwat
tract and have by association and intermarriage become so assimilated
as to be practically identified with them.
· The Marwats, who are Lodít Afgháns, have no such customs as the
dúm and that of the seven strings, the tying of the bridegroom's sheet to
that of the bride's sister, or the sword drippings, which are in vogue
among the Khataks, nor do they employ dúms in the same way.
* These three appear to be also called the Dreplára (or clan of the three fathers) Musa Khel.
As the Marwat are the most númerous of the Pathán tribes of Bannu, so the Dreplára are
the most numerous of the Marwat, their villages extending from Lakki to the hills with
extensive settlements in the Thal also. Of the Drepiára the most important section is the
Àchu Khel, with sub-sections called Begu and Isák and the Khudá Khel among whom the
Sikandar Khel are pre-eminent. (This account appears to make the Khuda Khel a
branch of the Achu Khel). The Músá Khel extend from the Nográm to the left bank of the
Kurram, and their principal sections are the Takhti Khel, Bahrám Khel, Pasanni and
Januzai. The Tappi clan is generally counted with the Músá Khel. It includes the
Adamzai and Wali Marwats. The Bahrám have two sections, Totazai and Umar-Khan Khel,
with their leading sub-sections, the Ghazni Khei and Pahár Khel, respectively : Bannu
Gazetteer, 1907, p. 58.
So one authority. But the Marwat are Lohánis, not Lodis,



72
Maryál-Masáni.
At the time of betrothal a threaded needle is given by the girl's
father to the dallál. At the time of marriage the janj of the bride-
groom is opposed by the girl's party, but is admitted on payment of
Rs. 5 or Rs. 10 to the girl's dúm. On arrival at bed-time a feast is first
held-the men of both parties assembling at the hujrá. The boy and
four or five of his chosen companions have to wait until the rest have
eaten. They are then taken to the courtyard of the girl and one of
her relations dresses him in a new suit of clothes which he gives him,
Menhdí is then put on his band and on those of the men with him by
the girl's mirásan, They then retire to the chauk, and spend the night
in singing, watching boys dance, etc., and early next morning the girl,
having been attired as a married woman by the mirásan and having
had mendhi put on, is placed on a pony and rides ahead of the party
with the boy's father or brother leading her. On arrival at the boy's
village he gives a feast for which every villager gives a rupee, a care-
ful record of the payment being kept in order that a similar sum may
be repaid at a marriage in the donor's family. On her arrival the girl
refuses to alight until she is given something, such as a cow.
At night she is married. She usually consents to forego the greater
portion of her dower at this time in exchange for the khairát of the
chulha, or a right to give away alms. She remains two nights and is
taken away on the third night. She stops with her parents a few days
and then returns. in
Mariát, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Masáik, Masháik, see Shaikh.
MASAN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MASAND, MASANDÚ, fem. -Aní, a body of Sikh devotees who appear to have been
employed as collectors of religious offerings for the Gurús until their ex-
actions led to their suppression and almost complete extermination, though
a few scattered families still survive. The story goes that Gurú Rám Rai,
who was an adept in yoga, was in a trance when the masunds burnt
his body. His widow wrote to Sri Hargovind, his father, to complain
of this hasty act in particular and of the peculation and vices of the
masands. Sri Hargovind accordingly proceeded to Dera Dún and there
burnt 11 masands alive, Gurú Govind also was asked by his Sikhs
whether the pujáris whom he had sent out to preach, but who applied
the offerings collected by them to their own use, were called masands,
but in spite of their reiterated complaints the Gurú was reluctant
to take action. At last a band of mimics (naqliás) visited the Gurú and
he asked them to perform a farce representing the doings of the masands.
They accordingly gave a dramatic representation of the wasteful extor-
tion and immorality attributed to these potaries, and so excited the
Gurú's compassion for his disciples that he had the masands all captured
and brought to Anandpur where he destrosed them, to the number of
2,200, in hoiling oil and by other torments, in Sambat 1757. A few
however escaped and were excommunicated or eventually pardoned.
Cf. Mina Masandia, Panjabi Dicty., p. 733.
Masání, -16, one who removes the remains of a burnt corpse.



Mashan-Mauả.
Mashán, a sept of second grade Kanets found in Mellam, & village of
pargana Rájgáon in Kanaur. Cf. Sanskr. mashán, & goblin : and see
under Shyuna, and Rákshas.
MASHHADÍ, a SAYYID clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Montgomery.
Máshki, Máski, fem. -An, fr. mashak, masak, a water-skin: one who carries
water in a skin, i.e. a water-carrier for Muhammadans. See under
Jhínwar. The Máshki is not a caste, but a Muhammadan Jhínwar
who is of necessity employed only by Muham madans.
MASHwání, a non-Pathán sept found principally in Jandol and also in
Maidán (Bájaur) of unknowr. origin, but probably of the same stock
as the Mashwání near Kábul. They own no land, but cultivate as
tenants. Cf. Mishwapi.
Masoke, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MASBANKE, a Kbarral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Mastáns, fem. -í, a Muhammadan faqir.
MASTÁNI, a sect of faqirs who wear anklets of bells (ghungrús) on their
feet and dance in the streets; they are said to collect one pice at each
house.
MASTIyána, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Maswán, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Maſ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MATANNI, one of the 5 main branches of the Plain MOHMANDS.
MATAR, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Matí, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
MATRO, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
MATTIÁNA, a sept of Kanets, found in Hindúr (Nálágarh).
Matú, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
MAOLAI, a sect to which belong all the people of Hunza, Ponyál, Zebak,
Shighnán, Roshan, Munjan, Kolah and Darwáz, more than half those
of Sirikot, Wakhan, Yassin, and most of those of the Ludkho Valley in
Chitral. Mauláis are also said to be found in Afghánistán, where they
are known as Muftadis, and elsewhere. The head of the sect is the
Agha Khán of Bombay, the spiritual chief of the Khojas. Next in
rank to him is Shah Abdul Rahím of Zebak. The countries inhabited
by the Mauláis are roughly divided amodo a number of hereditary pirs,
but residence dues not give a pir authority over the whole of any
special district. Treated with extraordinary respect, the pirs receive
the best of every thing a Maulai possesses and transmit a portion of
their offerings yearly to the Agha Khán. Below them in rank are
khalifas, who merely collect offerings.
The Mauláis assert that their sect was founded by the Indir
jafir Ali Sadig, but the author of the Zubdxt-ul-Akhbár says that it
was founded by Muhammad Mahdi, sixth in descent from that Imám,
in 299 H. First known as the Ismailias his followers recognised
AND8.



the Hind, one time Secret of
Maulai tenets.
him as the 12th Imám. Driven from Egypt by Salah-ud-Din, the tenets
of the sect were brought to Persia by Hassan-i-Sabbah who established
himself in Alamaut. Thus the Mauláis belong to or are an offshoot
of the great Muhammadan order of the Assassins and are spiritually
akin to the Druses of Lebanon. Synonyms are Mugli or Mawalli.
The kalima of the Mauláis is changed every year under instructions
from their spiritual head. The unorthodoxy of the Mauláis is
illustrated by the fact that they make no secret of the practice
of drinking liquor, which was at one time universally drunk in
the countries to the south of the Hindu Kúsh.
One of the precepts of the sect is that a man should conceal his faith
and his women,' and their tenets are therefore difficult to ascertain,
but they undoubtedly estoom Ali who they say was born of Light as
an incarnation of the Deity and superior to Mubammad himself. Dis-
carding the idea of a future life they believe in the metem psychosis. A
good Maulái is as one dead (to the world), prayers therefore are un-
necessary, as is fasting, and the practical religion of an uneducated
Maulái consists in little more than obedience to his pir and making
offerings to him and the Imám or Sáhib-i-Zamán, the spiritual chief,
and to him alone is pilgrimage made. A Maulái should blind himself
to escape envy.of others' prosperity, weaken his hands lost they take
what is another's, and lame himself that he may be unable to disobey
his pír. Cattle that have strayed into his field should not be driven out
till they have eaten their fill of the crop.
Marriage appears to be a pare contract, and a wedding can be
solemnized by any grey-beard. He seats the bride on his left and the
groom on his right, and taking a few pieces of roasted sheep's liver in
each hand gives some to the bride with his right hand and some to the
groom with his left, crossing his arms. He also gives half a cup of
water to the bride. A few words from the Kalám.i-Pír, a sacred
Persian book wbich is kept secret and used in place of the Qurán by
the Mauláis, complete the wedding ceremony.
On the death of a Maulái the choicest articles of his portable
property are set aside for the Imám-i-Zamán. No food is cooked in
the house for from three to eight days, according to the rank of the
deceased, and the family subsist an food cooked elsewhere. Food is
also placed on trees and exposed places for birds to eat. On the even-
ing of the appointed day a khalifa comes to the house, and food is
cooked and offered to him. He eats a mouthful and places a piece of
bread in the mouth of the dead man's heir after which the rest of the
family partake. The lamp is then lighted (from which the ceremony
is called chirágh roshan), and a six-strioged guitar called gharbá being
produced, singing is kept up for the whole night.
A Maulái puts no slabs or headstone on a grave, but oply one small
stone in the centre.
The fact that Mauláis, who are un questionably spiritual descend-
ants of the Assassins, are found in Afghánistán may, it is suggested,
account for the practice of ghaza among the Patháns. Prof. Browne
refers to this sect as MÚLÁS.



Mávi-Muzbi.
75
MÁvi,* or MOVANNA. The two words appear to be synonymous. Before the
Kshatriyas overran the Simla Hills the Kanets were a marauding race,
despising agriculture and engaged in internecine raids. Each party in
a Kanet village at that period had its own leader, known as the
movanna (leader) who in addition to his share of the plunder used to get
a small tribute as a haq-i-sardári. The whole of the hills was divided
into petty jurisdictions--the first place as rulers being given to the
gods, and the next to the movunnas. The ruins of the bouses of these
movannas are still to be found ; they are big castle-like buildings.
The Kshatriyas, who came from the plains, were respected by the
people for their skill in the arts of civilization, and lands were
granted to the Brahmanę who accompanied them as priests. Even-
tually the Kshatriyas by their superior civilization got the opper hand
and expelling or destroying the movannas toox possession of the whole
country, reducing the Kanets to vassalage.
In Kullu the mováni are described by Diackt as the headmen of
villages in remote times before even the rule of the Thákurs (who were
displaced by the Rájás) had begun. To them is attributed the construc-
tion of many staircases and buildings in cut-stone which tbe people of
the present day have lost the art of building. Cf. Mrichh.
MAYÁRZAI, one of the 5 main branches of the Plain Moamands,
Mazári, an important organised Baloch tuman, practically found only in
Dera Gházi Khán, of which District it occupies the southernmost por.
tion, its western boundary being the hills and eastern the river. Its
country extends over the Sind frontier into Jacobábád, and stretches
northwards as far as Umarkot and the Pitok pass. Rojhán is the chief's
headquarters. The Mazári say that about the middle of the 17th century
they quarrelled with the Chándia of Sindh, and moved into the Siáháf
valley and Marko plain, and the hill country to the west now occupied
by the Bugti; but obtaining grants of land in the lowlands gradually
shifted eastwards towards the river. The ruling clan, the Bálácháni,
traces its descent from Hot, son of Jalál. But the rest of the tribe,
except the Kirds, is Rind. It is divided into three clans, Rustamani,
Masídáni, and Sargáni, of which the first two are the more numerous.
MAZBI, or more correctly Mazhabi, is a Chúhịa who has become a Sikh. Sikh
Chúhrás are almost confined to the Districts and States immediately
east and south-east of Lahore, which form the centre of Sikhism. Mazbi
means nothing more than a member of the scavenger class converted to
Sikhism. The Mazbis take the pahul, wear their hair long, and abstain
from tobacco, and they apparently refund to touch night-soil, though
performing all the other offices hereditary to the Chúhra caste. Their
great guru is Tegh Bahadur, whose mutilated body was brought back
from Delhi by Chúhşas who were then and there admitted to the faith
by Guru Gobind as a reward for their devotion. But though good
Sikhs so far as religious observance is concerned, the taiot of hereditary
pollution is upon them, and Sikhs of other castes refuse to associate
with them even in religious ceremonies. They often intermarry with
the Lal Begi or Hindu Chúhịa. They make capital soldiers and
* It is possible that the word Mávi is connected with mau, a word which appears to mean
a grant or fief, and is found as a place-name in KángȚa and in Jullundur.
† Kulu Dialect of Hindi, p. 78.



Mazhabi-Meg.
some of our Pioneer regiments are wholly composed of Mazbis.
One of the bravest of the generals of the Gurús, was Jiwan Singh, a
Mazbi, whose tomb is still shown at Chamkaur in Ambála. He fell at its
siege in 1705.06. During the Muhammadan persecution of the Sikhs
they dropped out of notice and failing a supporter in the place of Guru
Govind, they never came to the front as a class, although Maharaja Ranjit
Singh had a great admiration for their bravery and enlisted them freely.
Being afraid, however, to form them into separate corps, he attached
a company to various battalions. They were, however, looked down
upon by the other men and naturally became discontented. When the
Punjab was annexed, the Mazbi was a dacoit, a robber and often a
thag. In this capacity he was generally styled a Rangretha. The latter
are a class of Mazbi apparently found only in Ambála, Ludhiana, and the
neighbourhood who consider themselves socially superior to the rest.
The origin of their superiority, according to Sir Denzil Ibbetsop's
information, lies in the fact that they were once notorious as
highway robbers ! But it appears that the Rangrethas have very
generally abandoned scavengering for leather-work, and this would
at once account for their rise in the social scale. In the hills Rangretha
is often used as synonymous with Raogrez, or Chhímba or Lilári, to
denote the cotton dyer and stamper, and in Sirsa the Sikhs will often call
any Chúhịa whom they wish to please Rangretha, and a rhyme is
current Rangretha, Gúru, ka beta, or “the Rangretba is the son of the
Gurú." The Mazbis have social distinctions among tbemselves. The
descendants of the true Mazbis who rescued Tegh Bahadur's body are
strictly speaking, the only asl or real Mazbis, but the term is applied
loosely to more recent converts. Recent converts are looked upon
more or less with a critical eye and are termed Malwáis. This term
was probably a geographical distinction at first, but is now merely a
caste one. It takes some generations to make a Mazbi, but how many
he cannot say. Much depends on circumstances, and on the strictness
of the convert's adherence to the faith as to when he may be admitted
to an equal footing with a true Mazbi. For this reason the asl Mazbi is
scarce and his physique is falling off. Until quite lately he was never
found in large numbers in any special locality, except for the purpose of
work or a new canal or railway. Two or three Mazbi houses are
attached to Ját villages where they work as labourers. Grants of land
have, however, been made in Gujranwala to pensioners of Pioneer
regiments. The Mazbi gots are numerous and many of them are the
same as those of the Ját, doubtless following the family or group whose
hereditary servants they were. In their customs too, at weddings,
etc., they conform to a great extent to those prevalent among the Játs.
MAZHABI, see Mazbi.
Mazu, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Medo, Balochi a boatman.
Mxa.-The Meg was described by Ibbetson, $ 653, as the Chamár of the tract
immediately below the Jammu hills :-"But he appears to be of a slightly
better standing than the Chamár; and this superiority is doubtless
owing to the fact that the Meg is a weaver as well as a worker in
leather, for weaving stands in the social scale a degree higher than shoe-
making. Like the Chamárs of the plains the Megs work as coolios,
anding than the the Meg'is a wens a degree hig



hich banks of the heif nare toe e Megh.
Megal-Megh.
and like hill menials they work much in the fields. General Cunningham
is inclined to identify them with the Mechioi of Arrian, and has an
interesting note on them, at pages liff, Vol. II of his Archæological
Reports, in which he describes them as an inferior caste of cultivators
who inhabited the banks of the upper Sutlej at the time of Alexander's
invasion, and probably gave their name to the town of Makhowal.”
The latter suggestion is quite untenable. See Megh.
Megal, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MEGH, or Mihngh, a low caste found mainly in Siálkot and along the Jammu
border : also in Amritsar, Gurdaspur, Gujrát and Lahore. In Ráwalpindi
it is called Meng. In Sialkot it gives the following tradition of its
origin :-
In early times its ancestor, who claimed Rrahmanic parentage,
used to dwell in the city of Kanshi or Benares. He had two sons,
one a very learned pandit and the other quite illiterate. He asked the
elder to teach the younger, but he disobeyed the order, and indigpant
at this his father turned him out of his house. The boy set for the
north out of the province (Jammu) and began to teach children like his
ancestors. In the course of time he also begau to celebrate the jag
hawan. Once when performing a jag aswameda,* his charms failed to
breath life into the dead body of the cow. As people then began to
look upon him with distrust and hatred he sent for his father whose
charms succeeded in bringing to life the dead cow. His father,
however, forbade him to eat with himself for a while but promised that
he would after a time revoke this prohibition. But the son grew angry,
relinquished all connection with his father, and thus became the
founder of a new caste whose descendants are the Mihnghs.t
The caste worships a guru whose gaddi, or place of residence,
is in Keran, a village some three miles from the town of Jammu.
His decision is final with regard to every matter whether social,
ceremonial or religious. I They seldom take a case into court. Touch
is ignored among the Mihngbs except by one of its sub-sections,
the Basith. If they are living in a Muhammadan village, they eat
their leavings, and such is also the case with regard to Hindus.
At the guru's suggestion a monster meeting of the Mihnghs
was held in March 1900, when it was unanimously resolved that
to the distinguin eta brohibi ile her the Moolace of Ja Socie
revoke thith his tos are the
* This jag is thus performed :-Boef is thrown into a burning fire, and the cow that
was killed is brought to life again by the power of mantras or charms.
+ The story is not universally known amongst the Mihnghs, many of whom state that they
are descendants of Sahap Sachcha, a brother of Brahma and Shivji who was excommunicated
by them for touehing the body of a dead cow, though it was at their own request that he
had taken upon himself the responsibility of throwing the dead animal away from the
houso. In support of this claim that they are of Brahmanic descent the Mihnghs say that
the period of kirya among them and the Brahmans is the same, viz., 11 days, while the
period exceeds 11 days in all other Bindu castes.
• t The guru himself is a Mihngh. Rám Dás, the present representative of the house. is
the great grandson of Báwá Bhagta, its founder. The influence of the guru extends to all
the districts in which Mihnghs are found. Their original home is in Jammu. In the terri.
tory of the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, the guru has his agents known by the title of
mintar. Each mihtar has a fixed jurisdiction over which he has a full control. The cases
which are of a serious nature and cannot be disposed of by him are taken to the guru.
& The Basith form an upper class amongst !he Mihnghs. They live to the north of Jammu
in a tract extending, it is said, for 100 miles. They own and till land and some of
them also enter State service. Another superior sept is the Dhian, also found in the Jammu
hills. Both these classes hold aloof from the other Mihnghs.



Megh customs.
« in future they will never eat the leavings of Muhammadans." But
practically the old custom is still in vogue.
The Mihnghs, the Basith excepted, used to eat the flesh of dead
animals, but by a contract which was concluded and signed in 1879,
through the influence of the guru of Keran, they pledged them-
selves to total abstinence from it. A breach of this agreement
makes a man liable to pay Rs. 25 to Government, Rs. 5 to the
headmeo of the village, and a sum, fixed according to the means
of the offender, as a penalty to the brotherhood. In default of
payment he is liable to exclusion from the caste. Since 1879 none
bave ever eaten such flesh.
At a boy's wedding Mihnghs observe no ceremony in their own
house, but collect a few leading members of the brotherhood and go
to the house of the girl's father, accompanied by the bridegroom.
There they perform some of the necessary ceremonies and the next day
bring the girl to their own house. On the following morning the
members of the brotherhood carry the bridegroom and the bride to a
malah or mulberry tree, under which they seat the couple. A long
thread mauli is wrapped round the stem of the tree and all present,
together with the couple walk seven times round it. Afterwards a
quantity of churma (loaves of bread and pounded sugar) is distributed
to the assembly. After this they return home and are fed sumptuously
at the expense of the bridegroom's father.
The Brahman priests of the Mihnghs are said to get their dues (birt)
at. weddings, but do not attend them, though all the Hindu rites are
gone through with the pándha's assistance.
Widow remarriage is permitted, but a widow is expected to marry her
deceased husband's elder or younger brother. Failing both of them she
can, with the consent of her guardians, give her hand to any man of the
caste* to which the deceased belonged. But if she wishes to marry a
man of a different caste from that of her former husband, he must bear
all the expenses of the marriage, or if unable to do so he must give his
sister or daughter or any other near relative to some wale member of
the widow's household in exchange. When a widow declines remarri-
age, she is provided with the necessities of life by contributions made of
the tribesmen of the village and is held in high esteem.
• The Mihnghs employ Brabmans for religious and ceremonial purposes,
but these Brahinaus are looked down upon by other Brahmans.
Failing the services of such Brahmans the caste employs pándhas or
prayer-sayers who are also termed goráis.
By occupation the Mihnghs are largely weavers, and they profess to
have learnt this calling from Kabír the Bhagat. But they also follow
various other pursuits, as for example, service es field labourers or
domestics.
By religion also the Mihnghs are said to be followers of Kabir, but
they also affect the guru of Keran in Jammu already mentioned.
• By 'caste' here we must understand got or section.
+ Indood in Gujrát Mengh appears to bo merely a synonym for Juláhá or weaver.



Meglá-Meo.
.
Awo.
The following are returned as the gots of the Mibnghs :-
Angale.
Bujale.
Kanchre.
Purane.
Baiye
Chakhare.
Kharát.
Runkú.
Bhadu.
Changotre.
Kbaratro.
Sagotre....
Bhalule.
Damathiye.
Mågotro,
Sakolye.
Bhakbaiye. Godhar.
Maitle.
Sangrál.
Bharyar.
Kale.
Mamwaliye.
The Mihngbs also returo the following gotras as gots or as each
comprising a number of gots :
1 Kushal.
3 Uttar.
5 Sangaral. 1 7 Kalr.
2 Bhardawáj. I 4 Káship.
6 Pandam.
8 Suraj Mukbi.
The Megh also appear to be found in Ráwalpiadi where they tre
called Meng.
In Sirsa Megwál is a honorific term for a Chamár, just as Dheſh or
Dhedh is a term of abuse. See also under Menghwal.
MEGLÁ, & Jág clan (agricultural, found in Multán.
MEADO, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MBAMÁR, see Mihmár.
MEKAN, & small tribe classed as Ját (agricultural) and said to be of
Panwár origin, and sprung from the same ancestor as the Dhúng.
They occupy the Sháhpur bár lying to the west of the Gondal territory,
and are also found in smaller numbers in Jhelum and Gujrát. They
are a pastoral and somewhat turbulent tribe.
MELú, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MØTHA ?, (Balochi), a fisherman. See Medh.
MEN, an Aráín clau (agricultural) found in Montgomery. See also under
Meun.
MENAS, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MENG, ser under Meg.
MenghwÁL.-The Dhedhs of Baháwalpur, or Menghwáls as they prefer to
be called, are the people called Chamárs in the east of the Punjab.
They eat the flesh of dead animals and are regarded as outcastes
by the Hindus, though they have Hindu names. They have nine
exogamous sections ;
1 Gandel.
1 4 Sapune.
1 7 Japál.
2 Bárú-Pal.
| 5 Lílar,
8 Lakhále.
3 Sáhdal. 16 Bahmanián. 9 Turke.
The Menghwál marriage ceremonies rosemble those of the Arorás,
and Brahmans serve them as parohits, accepting dry food from them
bat not food cooked by them. Marriage is usually effected by ex.
change. Tbe Menghwals greatly affect the shrine of Raham Dhani or
Raham Shah in the Raneja iláqa of Bíkáner. By occupation they are
generally weavers, manufacturing blankets (bhura, lokar and bhaggal).
They dislike cultivation. Their huts are made of reeds shaped like a
dome and very narrow, so that it is said that when a Dhedh sloops io
his hut he puts his feet outside. The Thoris (Náiks) resemble the
Dhedhs. The term Menghwal is undoubtedly only & variant of Mrch.
M50.-A highly composite tribe found in the hill country of Gurgaon, Alwar
and Bhartpur, and also scattered over the Delhi District and the
Bawal nizámat of Nábha. The Meos have given their name to the



80
The Meo divisions.
Mewat,* a tract whose boundaries are defined in the Imperial Gazetteer
of India, s.v. Mewát.
In the Muhammadan historians the Meos appear to be unknown by
that name, but the Mewátis were notorious throughout the Muham-
madan perioa.
The Meos are divided into 52 original gots, which include 12 páls,
whose names are printed below in capitals, together with a 13th
palákara, and two gots of recent accretion :-
Serial No.
Name of the
original tribe.
Name of the
got or pál.
Name of the mother
| village or place whence
it originated.
Principal villages belonging
to each got.
n
a
or
w
Do.
o
DEROWÁL OR | Delhi.-Malab in Núb | Púnahána, Mooli, Andana.
DARWÁL.
tahsil,
Tain, &c. (South of Nuh).'
LANDÁWAT
Do. Niána Bhagora in Firozpur, Naoli and Bhagor
· Alwar State. (Firozpur valley).
RATÁWAT ... Do. Sathori in Alwar Patrali, Sahori, Alapur, Bil.
| gari, &c.
BALUT OR Do. Gaddi Dhaina ... Baraka, Lehrwari, Seri, Sangal
BALAUT.
Harí and Chándanki,
Sarohia
Do. (?) Seswala, tabssl Fatehpur Taja, Sarohi in the
Gurgaon. | Balabgaſh tahsil, Segwala,
&c.
Bodian
Alawalpur in Núh Alawalpur, Garaoni, &c.
tahsil.
Gomal
Takra in Alwar... Kbatika Aganu, Nushehra, &c.
Bhamla
Sabghar, tahsil Titraka-Chamruli, Jaroli, &c.
Firozpur.
Mangaria . Do. Mangar in the Khaloka, Andhrola, Pacha-
Balabgarh tahsil. panka, Goraksar, Firozpur
| Namak, &c.
Kataria
Do. Majesar in the Marora, Karera, &c.
Balabgarh tahsil.
Jangali
Do. Rajauli ....... Dougarbas.
Chapolia
Bilawat
Bhagora in Alwar Sákras, Loraka, &c.
Bhagwat ... Bhagahta ... Tarwára, Maryaka, &c.
Kabgar
Janowat in the Jalika, &c.
Firozpur tahsil
Sakhaura
Dongarwali in Dougarwálí, Jhánsá Baowar
Bhartpur. Naharpur, &c.
Baliana ... Mangar, tahsil Nagaon, Tahangaon, Sakrawa,
Balabgarh. Dhanaj, &c.
Lamkhora ..
Naharwari Do. Dadi in Alwar ...
Tanur ori
Sarohia,
c
eleccionar ao
Do.
com les
o
* The Mewát is further subdivided into five tracts, Bhiána, Aroz, Dhangalwati, Nai-wára
and Pahat-wara. Of these Bhiána is the terrible lonesome country,' 1.e., the Bangar (upland)
tract of Palwal, Núh, Firozpur-Jhirka and Bhartpur. Arez is the low-lying country in
the Náb and Firozpur-Jhirka tahsils, along the eastern foot of the range which forms the
western boundary of the Gurgaon District. P. N. Q., I.. $ 133.
RHEA The other three tracts are named from as many páls, the Dhangal holding 360 villages,
the Nai and the Pahat or palákara 210 each. The other páls (which do not appear to give
their names to any tracts) hold the following numbers of villages :-
Saingal 52. Dhulut 360. | Landáwat 210.
Chirklot 94. Kalesa 75. Ratáwat 125.
Demrot 757, Derowál 252. Balut 250.
Panglot 84.
Honce the Moos bold 3,039 villagos in all,



l'he Meo divisions.
Name of the
original tribe. I
Name of the
got or pål.
Name of the mother
village or place whence
it originated.
Principal villages belonging
to each got.
Do.
Do.
NAIO
KA LB 8A OR Mewar
Kompur in Alwar.
KALSÁKHI.
Ghalot
Ghalot
Do. ... ... ... Nayan, tahsil Lachhmangarh
in Alwar.
Kachhwába ... DHAINGAL OR Amber, Jaipur and Raisina Ghasira, Raisina, Londa,
DAHNGAL.
Rahna, Gawala, &c. (in the
| north of Nubl.
SAINGAL ... Sahina ... ... ... | Badawali, Ismailpur, Sawana,
Badgujar ... 3
Patan, Sanghar, Mendhi, &c.
Badgujar Fatehpur Sikri ... Sanghar, Mendhi,
CHIRKLOT Mathura-Tahangarh in Kot-A tawar, Unmara, Dhulá.
Bhartpur, Pataudil wat, &c. (in the south-east of
and Dholat. | Nuh and round Púnahána).
DEMROT
Do. Bahangar h, Khajata, Ghata, Beswan, Rali,
Pataudi, Khajota Bisru, &c. in the Firozpur
in Alwar.
valley).
DAULOT
Do. Mauza Wadha... Sekri, Malakpur, Alaora, &c.
(in the same).
PANGLOT
Dholat Deswala Deswala and Bahala.
Nekuj in Alwar Nekuj but Dal Dha y y a,
Jadal
Mehdamka, &c.
Besar
Do. Malwasa, Kahera Sakaras.
near Alwar.
Nanglot Do. Pipal Khera in Pipal Khera, Bariska, &c.
Bhartpur.
Gurdal
Chahar Dudh in Malab, Nagina, Baoli, Raoli,
Alwar.
&c.
Boria
Khajota in Alwar Sathana.
Chuka.
Palkeora
Jodhpur, Satwasi, Ubbaka
Malakpuri, Jatwali, &c.
Jaudal
Kewar ... ... Kewar and Malawali.
Chandlot
Tahangarh and | Lassi.
Lassi in Alwar,
Badgujar ... ? Markatra
Do.
Khildar
Do. Nauj pur in Maujpur.
Alwar.
Jatláwat
Do. Andhwari . Andhwari.
Chauhan Ajmer-Taragaſh Muhammadpur near Meoli,
Nizamnagar in Alwar.
Bogan ... Do. Mandawar Mauza Mauja, Udana and Manotu.
in Alwar State.
Do. Kanwali in Re Badarpur, Jalálpur, Pakappur
wári tahsil. and Ketwara in Bhartpur
State.
Jamlia
Do. Mandawar ..
Patwar Ujjain in Gwalior and Rajaka, Karwari and Ninapur
Patwar
Palla in Núh tahsil. 1 in Alwar.
Li Mewal Jaroki in Alwar State ... (Polkheri and Ahmad Bas, &c.
Nirbán ....
PAHAT Mundáwar and Mazarpur | Guliara, Balag, Noshehr,
near Harsoli.
Selana, &c.
Miscellaneous Bhoslia
Manekpur, Gohri in Alwar,
&c.
Kharkatia...
Goria Nangal in Alwar.
| Bhatti
Nagaon in Alwar
Bhandarin
Bhatti
Bankáwat
Khokhar ...
Do.
Do.
Do.
Chauhan ...? | Kanwalia



The Meo páls.
To these have to be added twu gots, viz. () Ghori Pathan, descended
from a man of that race who married a Meo convert, and (ii) Bauráwat,
descended from a Brahman who eloped with a Meo woman, making 54
gots in all. Of the 52 original gots analysis shows that 3 are named after
the parent village,* 8 bear Rajput tribal names,+ 8 those of Brahman and
Gujars, and 4 occupational names,f while 16 are of unknown derivation.
Thus the Mewát is inhabited by and the Meo tribe is composed of four
Rajput stocks, Tanwars from Delhi, Jáduns from Mathura, Kachwáhás
from Jaipur and Cbaubáns from Ajmer: and it seems highly probable
that Meo simply means 'hill-man.'
However this may be Masaúd Ghází reached the Mowat in 1002 A.D.
and converted many of the Meos to Islám.ll The Rajputs thus converted
were of the Tunwar tribe and were divided into 5 páls, viz. Kalesa,
Derwál, Landáwat, Ratáwat and Balut. Subsequently, according to
a historically impossible tradition, Rai Pithora, annoyed at the
conversion of the Meos to Islám, employed the Badgujars to harass
them, and thus compelled them to revert to Hinduism. In the reign of
Qutb-ud-Din Ibak (in 1312 A.D.), Hemraj invaded the Mewat from
Alwar, but was defeated and slain by that ruler who then despatched
Sayyid Wajíh-ud-Din against the Meos. But that leader was slain
and it was reserved for his nephew Mirán Hussain Jang to subdue
the Meos, who agreed to pay jazia, while some accepted Islám.
Hussain Jang's flagstaff is still preserved by the Meos, who will not
take an oath on so sacred a name as his. .
The Meos who thus accepted Islána were divided into 7 páls :
Dahvgal (Kachwáhá), Saingal (Badgujar), Chirklot, Demrot, Panglot,
Dhulot and Nai (the last 5 being Jáduns by origin).
The Kalesa pál is eponymous and originated in Mewár, Kalsia
17 Kalesa) the eponym being called Moo in consequence. This pál is
sometimes called Pál Palbat, but erroneously.
The Derowál pál was founded by Dera of Malab in Núh. Der,
however, means ' a piece of land detached from the foot of a hill.
The Landáwat pál, founded by Landu, of Niána in the Kishengarh
tahsil of Alwar is also called Bbagoria from Bhagora, its earliest
settlement in Alwar, and Larawat, owing to its warlike propensities.
The Ratáwat pál claims descent from Rattu, of Santhori in Alwar :
but the name may well be derived from Rath or Rathauri, its earliest
seat.
* Nos. 9, 14 and 42.
+ Nos. 5, 11, 17, 21, 34, 40, 44 and 49.
# Nos. 6 and 33, 7, 24, 32, 38, 39, and 62.
Ś Nos. 10, 18, 51 and 50.
ů The tradition recorded in the Rajputána Gazetteer I., pp. 265 sq., is that the Moos were
converted in the lith century after their conquest by Masaúd, son of Amir Sálár and grand-
Son of Sultán Mahmúd (son of) Sabuktagin (sic) on the mother's side, general of Mahmúd
of Ghazni's forces, who is venerated by the Meos and by whose name they swear. Now
Säär Magaúd, nephew of Mahmúd of Ghazni, was a historical personage, who died at Bahraich
in Oudh in 1033. But it is highly improbable that the Muhammadans attempted the con.
west of a poor and difficult country like the Mowat prior to 1033.
" On the other hand Qutb-ud-Din took Delhi in 1193 and died in 1210, so that the second
Jonversion of the Meos cannot have occurred in 1312 if it happened in his reign. But it
probably took place a good deal later.
The Ka the eponym boing but erroneously.
Melab in Núh. Der,
* fttoo



Meo factions.
The Balút pál is also eponymous, and originated in Silkhoh, in the
Núh tahsil.
The Dahngal pál claims descent from Rája Harpál, a descendant of
Rája Nal. His eldest son Dahngal became a Muhammadan and the
pál is named after him, but it is also called Raisinia from Rásina, his
original home in Nuh tahsil, or Ghaseria, from Ghasera in the same
tahsil, to which place Dahngal migrated.
The Saingal pál is named after its eponym.
The Chirklot pál claims descent from Chirkan Rao of Dhuláwat in
Núh, but it is said that the ancestors of this and the four following
páls were imprisoned by Qutb-ud-Din Ibak in Ballabgaſh, and only
escaped in various disguises. Thus the Chirklots' foreboar was dis-
guised as a chhinka seller and so obtained for his descendants the name
of Chirklot.
The Demrot pál is also known as the Raopálá after Rao Bhimar, its
founder, who was styled Demur. It, too, is fancifully derived from deru,
a drum or some kind of musical instrument.
The Panglot pál claims descent from Poan, and is improbably de-
rived from pongi, also a kind of musical instrument.
The Dhulot pál is similarly descended from Dohal, its ancestor,
or the name is derived from dohal, "in which he used to lie, as if
insane. The head-quarters of this pál is at Doha in Firozpur.
Naipál is derived from Nai,' barber,' or hardly less improbably
from niyai, because its founder gave an impartial decision in the
tribal dissensions.
The palákara, or little pál, ranks, it is said in Gurgaon, below the 12
páls, but it is also said to claim to be superior to them.* Its founder
was a Rathanri, and it is sometimes known as the Pal Palhat, a name
wrongly applied to the Kalsia pál. Ope account makes him a Nirbán
by got and his wife a Badgujar, deriving Pahat from Pataudi, where
the sept settled after leaving Raniagaſh in Alwar.
The Meos are, or rather the Mewát is, distraught by faction, and the
old feuds are kept alive by the ballads of the Mirásis. In these the
Gurdit and Surdit Játs side with the Chirklot and Dahngal páls, while the
Ráwat Játs are allied with the Demrot. The Ráwats' objectives used
to be the strongholds of Nangal, Babána, Manpar, Pahri and Andhup;
while the first-named party sought to take Kot Utawar and Hanodal.
In 1857 this feud broke out afresh. The Surdit Játs of Hodal and the
Ráwats aided the Chirklot. The women on each side brought water to
the men on the field of battle and encouraged them with reminiscences
of the Meos' ancient prowess. Neither the women nor the priests
were molested by the enemy, and the latter could always stop à fight.
if one side ran short of ammunition, by spreading a sheet on the
ground between the combatants. Prisoners used to be hospitably
entertained
groune side ted by the prowess and
* When the 12 páls were formed, runs the tale, the Palákara's founder was absent, and so
no pál was assigned to him. When he did arrive he was told : “ Já sab pál aur terá sab var
palákara"-"Go, all the septs are called páls, but thine is to be called pálákara, the highest
of all," This tale is recounted with great pride by the Pálákara Moos,



Meo dress, etc.
The Chirklot pál is also rent by an internal feud between two villages.
It began early in the 19th century by cattle trespassing on land sown
for barvest and broke out again in 1857 when a pitched battle was
fought, three or four villages being destroyed and others plundered,
without any decisive result.
In religion the Meos profess a happy combination of Hinduism and
Islám, but in practice they worship countless godlings or symbols such
as Siani, Mangti, Lalchi, Sálár Masaúd and his fag.
For instance they keep the Holi like Hindus but also give alms in
the name of Abraham who was cast into the fire by Nimrod's orders,
whereupon the flames turned to flowers. In this story they see a re-
semblance to the story of Harnakas who would have put his son Pahlád
to death, had not Holká his nwn sister, whose body was of stone, res-
cued the lad and allowed herself to be burnt in the flames while Pah-
lád remained unhurt. A trace of an old colt is found at the shrine of
Sháh Chokha, whose fair was formerly a great place for elopements, it
being held a sufficient answer from a man who left the fair with another
Meo's wife to say that Sháh Chokha had given her to him.
The personal appearance of the Meo has tempted other tribes to
dub him Langur on 'baboon.'
The old dress of a Meo consisted of a tania or triangular piece of
rumáli made of coarse cloth and worn in lieu of a dhoti, being 3 or 4
inches wide in front and a finger in breadth behind. Young bloods often
used to adorn the front piece with pictures embroidered in fine needle-
work, and as this was the ceremonial robe nothing else was worn, but
it is not now used except as a night-dress. Nowadays the Mec8
wear the ordinary dress of the south-east Punjab, but tie the turban
in a peculiar way, while the young bloods affect a red dhots and wear
it so as to shew the knees. Well-to-do men also display earrings and
bangles, and their poorer brethren keep bits of straw in their ears
against the time when they can afford earrings of gold or silver. A
necklet of shells, sometimes interspersed with charnes, is also worn,
The beard is shaved but not the moustache. Wrestlers, champions wear
yellow clothes and carry a heavily ironed club. Young men aspire to
proficiency in music, singing and dancing, but many of their songs are
obscene.
Women wear a lahnga, drawers of coarse cloth, which is called
zumardi or lungi. It is tied round the loins by a string, and is un-
becoming. Scanty stays (angia) are used to support the breasts- leaving
the back and chest exposed. A jacket, with sleeves only 3 or 4 inches
long, is also worn; and on the head & small scarf. Decency consists
in covering the loins, not in veiling the face or breast. Their ornamenta
are few, comprising a bála, armlet, báli, ear-rings, jhumká, pendant,
hamel, necklace, bracelets, rings, etc., of different colours.
The men do all the out-door work connected with the fields, such as
ploughing, irrigating, reaping, etc. The women do all the in-door work.
They grind the corn, milk the cows and churn. They prepare meals
for the cultivators and carry them to the fields where they are at work,
bringing back bundles of fodder. At noon they again take food to the
workers and bring back fodder for the cattle. They prepare maheri



Meo usages.
85
for their men-folk in the evening, and keep hot water ready for them
and also put down grass for the cattle. In short, the women work
more than the men. With the exception of a few well-to-do men few
Meos have any furniture. One or two bed-steads and 2 or 3 chárpáis
are all that is to be found in their houses. n the chaupál (guest-houses)
will be sien large bed-steads on which 4 or 5 persons can sleep. Their
vessels are generally of earth but neat and clean.* They call & plate
sainkhi and a cup dhumri. They generally eat maheri in the morning
and a full meal at noon. They live chiefly on maheri as it saves money
and does not impede their work. It is also less costly when labourers
are paid in 'food. Maheri with milk is given to guests and respectable
members of the family. The Meos are very hospitable, serving their
guests with better food than they eat themselves, generally giving
them rice, sugar, ghi, etc. Very few amoug them possess spare clothes
or ornaments, but such as they have they keep in a bag called ghagra
or reelt basket.f Ornaments are placed in earthen vessels or corn bins
or buried in the ground.
Marriage is solemnised by nikáh, generally in Sáwan, but a date in
the lunar month is fixed for it. Remarriage, however, is not so solem-
nised. Thus if a liaison between a man and a woman last for a year
or so, and the latter give birth to a child she will put on a new scarf
and bangles and be regarded as the man's legitimate wife, the only
ceremony being the distribution of boiled rice among his kinsmen.
But if the pair fall out and her first husband turns up, the woman
leaves, puts her scarf in her second husband's bouse and returns to the
old one. The father-in-law is called chaudhri or muqaddam, orma
specially Meo usage-dokrá, old man,' so that dokri is an uncompli-
mentary title to apply to a Meo woman.
Ganji, is the name of a food which is prepared by the Meos. It ap-
pears to be so called because it is made in a large degh which the Meos
call ganji. The chief ingredients used are gur and rice, and it is made
thus : The gur is dissolved in water and cooked to a syrup. Hot
spices such as cloves, cardamums, cinnamon, etc., are then fried in ghi
and added to the syrup. Tbep rice is added and the whole allowed to
boil until the syrup is all absorbed by the rice.
This dish is made on two special occasions, viz. :-(a) When a man
dies and his heirs wish to feast friends and relatives, within 40 days of
the death. This custom is called fátiah. (6) Whenever a reconcilia-
tion is brought about by a panchayat between members of the brother.
hood whether of one pál or of separate pals. The parties who were at
feud with each other and the members of the panchayat all join in the
feast, the cost of which is, as a rule, borne by the party which the pan-
cháyat has decided to have beun at fault.
* In the rains old vessels are replastered with cow-dung, exposed to dry in the sun and
then rubbed with mung grassato remove greasiness. This process renovates them com-
pletely.
Women do not leave their husband's or parents' house without this basket. If one goes
without it she is supposed to have gone without permission or on a visit of condolence.
The Meo women observe the kalás, a custom common in Alwar, greeting a stranger in a
body headed by a girl with a water-pot on her head and all singing - Channing Sett. Reg.,
D. 59.



86
Meora-Meun.
MEORÁ, MEURA, fem. -í, (1) a Guru's priest, see Panjabi Dicty., p. 747; (2) a
gurú of the Chúhịa caste. The Moorás in Sirmúr State are said to form
a phirkú or sect apart from the Chábrás, though they take food, both
kachchi and pakki roți, and water from all Chúhrás. They resemble
the pádhas among the Hindus.
Merí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MBRMALHA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MEBAR, a Jáy clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
METIA, & tribe of Játs descended from its eponym, of Rájput extraction, and
settled in Sialkot since the time of Firoz Sháh. It is also found in
Multán tahsil, where it settled from the north in the time of Shah Jahan,
and in Montgomery where it is classed as Ját (agricultural). Some of
the Metla or Methla in the lower Derajat affect the title of Shaikh.
MEUŅ, (1) fem. -1, a sailor, boatmani, waterman. See Men. Also-
MEUN.-Tbe Meos of Mewát must not be confused with the Meos or Meuns
(Mens), a caste found on the Opper Jumpa and Márkanda rivers in
Karnál and Ambala. The latter are all Muhamm:dans and live by
fishing, and during the rains by trading in mangoes. The name is
said to mean' fisherman.' Nothing is known of their origin, but in
Saharanpur is a caste of Meus, who must be the same though, curiously
enough, they say they come from Rewári, i.e. from near the Mewat.
The only restriction on marriage is that two persons suckled at the
game breast must not marry. The women are midwives--and often
very clever in that vocation.* On the Sutlej in Ferozepore and Jul.
lundar the Meuy is also a fisherman. And in the latter District, where
he is also found on the Beins, he has taken to weaving, tailoring, well
sinking and service as a watchman The Meun indeed in this District
appears to be the same as the Jhabel and virtually identical with Mohána.
In customs they reseinble the lower Muhammadan tribes. After a birth
the bahar budhná is observed, the mother going out on the 5th night to
look at the stars. In betrothal the boy's parents take the iniiiative
and money is rarely paid for a bride. The Katpál section has a special
custom. All the men bers of a family assemble in a room and bring in
a young male buffalo (kațļa) covered with red cloth and its feet dyed
with henna. Then 54 seers of barley are offered it in a vessel and all
present do obeisance to the animal, which is believed to forthwith eat
24 mouthfuls of the grain and then to bolt, no man being able to detain
it. To this usage the Kat-páls owe their name. Another section, the
Hilmen (movers') owe theirs to an ancestor who once boked beef in his
house. Complaint was accordingly made to the ruler of the time, and
so he prayed silently to God, with such efficacy that when his cauldron
was searched it contained only moving baingan. The Mouņs, as a
body, also practise jhulka, f a custom in which a sun-in-law of the
family must set light to the furnace used at weddings to cook the large
quantities of food required. He carries a burdle of combustible material
from a distance and runs the gauntlet of a double line of women
* P.N. Q., I, § 129: and N.I.N.Q., I, § 457.
† Kat-pál means; apparently, 'raiser or protector of young buffaloes (katta).
#Lit, as much fuel as is thrown on the fire at a time : burning; Punjabi Dicty., p. 502,



Mián.
87
who stand with pitchers full of water, dust, bricks and sticks, to bar
his access to the furnace. Sometimes the women's clothes are burnt
and they are often hurt, while the son-in-law may be seriously injured.
His fee for this is a turban and a rupee-sometimes among wealthy
people it is more. After marriage the mukláwa usually follows at once,
if the parties are of” age : otherwise it is deferred till they attain
maturity, and then very little is spent on it. Each section has its own
usages with regard to feastings. No milk or curd is given away, even
to a son-in-law, for 10 or even 20 days: then rice is cooked in it and
distributed to maulavis and beggars, after which it can be given to any.
one. The Meuņs specially affect Khwaja Khizar.
Mián, (1) any sage or virtuous man. : A Miáná is the offspring of a Mián.
The word is used in a number of senses and especially in the follow-
ing: (2) it is used in the west of the Punjab to denote any holy man.
Thus the head of the SARAI family is known as the Mián Sahib Sarai:
(3) among the Patháns of Swát and Dir a Mián is a descendant
of a saint or spiritual leader who acquired repute among many
tribes prior to modern times. The title is not given to descendants of
E modern saint, but some of them may in course of time acquire' it.
Thus the descendants of the Akhúnd of Swát are as yet only Ákhund-
zádas by right, though styled Mián Gul by courtesy. Quraishis rank as
Mián : (4) also
Mián,* & superior class of Hill Rájputs. From ancient times till the early
part of the 19th century the area included in the outer ranges of the
Punjab Himálaya, between the Sutlej and the Indus, was held by
numerous independent States, each under its own hereditary chief.
Some of these principalities date back to the first centuries of the
Christian era, but Kángļa at least was much older, and others were
established as late as the 14th and 15th centuries.
According to Sir Alexander Cunningham the oldest classification
of these States divided them into three groups or confederacies,
each named after the State which held its hegemony. These were
Kashmír, Durgara or Dagar and Trigarta or Jallandhara. There are
indications that these three groups existed prior to the seventh century.
A later classification divided the Alpine Punjab into 22 Hindu and 22
Muhammadan chiefships, the former being to the east and the latter
to the west of the Chenáb. The 22 Hindu States fell again into two
groups or circles, the Jálandhar and the Dugar; the former lyiog
to the east and the latter to the west of the Rávi.
It is with these 22 Hindu States that we are now specially concernod.
They were all founded by Rajput leaders, each probably with a small
band of followers who either came direct from the plains or were
scious of one or other of the ruling families which had already settled
in the hills, and the descendants of all these noble families are dis-
tinguished by the honorific title of Míán,
The royal clan in each of these States had a special designation,
based on the custom which obtained in almost all the Rajput Hii
States, in accordance with which the ruling family took its name from
the country over which it ruled. Almost all these royal clans are still
onoricendantong famillect ich probe
This article is from the pon of Dr. J. Hutchison, of the Chamba Mission.



88
The Mián groups.
in existence in the direct line of descent, and where this is extinot
collateral branches of them still remain. They are popularly arranged
as in the following table : each group containing eleven names :-
JULLUNDOR CIROLE.
DUGAR CIROLE.
Country
Clan.
Country.
Olan.
1. Chamba ...
2. Basohli ......
3. Bhadu
... Chamiál.
Balauria.
Bhadwál.
1. Chamba
2, Núrpur
3. Guler
4. Datárpur
5. Síba ...
6. Jaswan
7. Kángſa
8. Kotlehr
9. Mandi
10. Suket
11. Kullu
Chamiál.
Parhánia.
Guleria.
Dadwal.
Sibai(a).
Jaswal.
Katoch.
Kotlenria.
Mandiál.
Suketia.
Kolua.
4. Mankot ..
5. Behandrálta
6. Jasrota
7. Sámba. ...
8. Jammu ...
9. Chaneni ...
10. Kashtiwár..
11. Bhadrawab
Mankotia.
Behandrál.
Jasroția.
Sambiál.
Jamwál.
Hiuntál.
Kashtiwária.
Bhadrawahia.
It will be observed that Chamba finds a place in both groups because
its territory is bisected by the Rávi: the number 22 is purely conven-
tional for in reality the States were always more numerous. In the
Dugar circle Cunningham gives Bhan, Rihási and Sirikot, and Barnes
includes Bhati but omits Chaneni. In addition to these there were also
Lakhanpur, Dalpatpur and Aknúr, the last being to the west of the
Chonáb.
In the Jullundur circle were included Bangáhal and Kotila, which
latter was ruled by a branch of the Núrpur family. The States of
Kahlúr (Bilaspur), Hindúr (Nálágarh) and Sirmúr (Nában), lying to
the east of the Sutlej, are also ruled by Míána. A slight correction is
necessary in the case of Kashtwar, the rulers of which were Muham.
madan from the time of Aurangzeb. They still, however, retained
their Hindu names and customs, and to the present day their
descendants are called Míán. The rulers of Aknúr and Rihási be-
longing to branches of the Jammu family seem also to have embraced
Islám. Cunningham includes Bhadrawáh among the Muhammadan
States, but this is incorrect as the ruling family was always Hindu.
Some of the clan names cannot be at once identified, for example
Pathánia, Dadwal, Katoch, Balauria and Hiuntál. Pathania is derived
froin Paithán, an abbreviation of Pratishtána ('the firmly established
place'), which was the ancient name of Pathankot, the original capital
of the Pathánia roling family. Dadwal is from Dáda, a place in Síba
whence the Datárpur family originally came. The name Kaçoch has



Mián sub-divisions.
89
ons but it aur, the firstura. Aiuntád still in use.
púria, Diacluded innt name ofura. liuof the Basamo
many fanciful erivations but it was most probably the ancient name
of Kángļa. Balauria is from Balaur, the first capital of the Basohli
State which again is a corruption of Vallapura. Hiuntál or Himtál
is from Hiuntá or Himtá, the ancient name of Chaneni, and still in use.
Other clan names not included in the above lists are :- Bangahália,
Lakhanpuria, Aknúria, Dalpatia, Bhatiál : also Kahlúria, Hindúria,
and Sirmauria.
Again each clan comprises numerous sub-divisions, each of which
has a distinctive al or family name. As the family multiplied, indi-
viduals lett the coart to settle on some estate in the country, and their
descendants, though still retaining the generic clan name, are further
distinguished by the name of the estate with which they became more
immediately identified. Sometimes, though not so frequently, the
name of the ancestor furnished a surname for his posterity and
occasionally a local circumstance, as a special tree or garden near the
home, or the quarter of the town in which the family resided, suggested a
name which was adopted as the family surname. In this way every
clan- includes several and sometimes many subordinate als or family
surnames, most of which are usually known to the various members of
the clan. For example, the Kațoch clan has four glund sub-divisions,
Jaswal, Guleria, Dadwal and Síbái, in addition to the generic appella-
tion, and each of these comprises many subordinate surnames.
Similarly, the Jamwal clan also has our sub-divisions :-Jasrota,
Mánkot, Lakhanpur and Sámba, each with its own separate family
names -- while all alike trace their descent from the Manhás tribe
of Rajputs. Among the Pathánias also there are 22 recognised sub-
divisions, and so on with all the other clans, the number in each clan
varying from time to time as new families are formed and old ones
become extinct.
When a Rájput is asked by one who will, he thinks, understand
these distinctions he will give his own family surname. To a
stranger he offers no detail but simply calls himself a Rájput. Some of
the older States bore names which were applicable both to the
country and the tribe by which it was inbabited. Such names are
Durgara, Trigarta and Kuluta. To these we may perhaps add
Sumaha, which in all likelihood was the ancient name of Basohli State;
and in all these States the name of the capital was different from that
of the principality. The States of later origin were usually named
after the capital, and when that was changed the name of the State
was changed with it. In such cases, however, the clan name usually
remained the same. Chamba is an exception, for the ancient capital
was at Brahmapura, now called Brahmaur and the ruling family takes
its name from the present capital.
That the Hill States were able to maintain their indopendence
alınost unimpaired through so many centuries was in great measure
due to their position and the inaccessible character of the country
In former times the hills were much more isolated than now, and while
on the plains empires rose and fell the kingdom of the hills uuderwent
little change. Not that they were always at peace among themselves,
for their history is largely a record of the wars which they waged with one
another. To the present day the people of Chamba regard it as unlucky to
the prinental and when that was however, the clan namo wanita



90
The Mián States.
mention the names of Jammu, Basohli and Núrpar, and when reference
to these places is necessary. Jammu and Basohli are spoken of as the
parlá mulk (the country across the Rávi) and Núrpur as the Sappar-
wala shahr the rocky town. These wars were for the most part
border forays, but though limited in scope they were not less destruc-
tive than sirailar struggles between powerful nations. To realise
this one has only to read the description by Forester, the traveller, of
the condition of the country around Basohli after the invasion of Ráj
Singh of Chamba in 1782. On the whole, however, the Bill Rájás
were mindful of one another's rights. Sometimes a powerful State
would subdue and oppress a weaker neighbour or even deprive it of
territory, but as a rule this led to no important political change.
Being all of the same race and faith and often nearly related to one
another by marriage or even closer family ties, they were generally
content to make one another tributary, or at the most to remove the
ruling Rája from power and set up another member of the same family
in his place. In only three instances, so far as is known, was one
State entirely subverted and absorbed by another. For the same reason
the shrines and ancient monuments usually escaped unscathed and any
damage done to these was the work of Muhammadan mercenaries in
later times.
It is, however, improbable that the Hill States were ever entirely
independent for any considerable period. Farishta, the Muhammadan
historian, tells us of a king of Kanauj, who in the first century A. Đ.
overran the hills from Kumaon to Jammu, subduing the 500 petty
chiefs of Nagarkot or Kángra. Towards the end of the 5th century,
as we learn from the Rájă Tarangini, the kingdom of Trigarta
was presented to Pravaresa (Siva) by the Raja of Kashmir. In the
7th century at the time of the visit of Huen Thsang Trigarta was
subject to Kanauj, and in the 9th century to Kashmir, which had
then extended its dominions to the Sutlej. Chamba was invaded
aod conquered in A. D. 800-10 by a race of foreigners, perhaps
Tibetans, who are called Kíra in the chronicle, and Kullu seems to
have been liable to inroads from the same people and was for
centuries tributary to Ladákh. Kushmir and Kashtwar also had each
its period of Tibetan rule. In the Ilth century, as at an earlier
period, Kashmír seems to have claimed supremacy over the whole
of the outer hills between the Rávi and the Indus. And in A. D.
1191-3 when the final struggle arrived between the Rájput ralers
of India and Muhammad of Ghor, we read that among the numerous
princes subject to Delhi were “ Kángra and its mountain chiefs.”
For several centuries after the establishment of Muhammadan rule
the Hill States continued to maintain practical independence, but
with the advent of Mughal ascendancy they were compelled to bow
to a foreign yoke. In A. D. 1556 Akbar the Great conquered
Kángra, and soon afterwards all the principalities of the western
Flills came directly under his control. The famous fort, of Kángra
Was garrisoned by imperial troops under a Mughal officer of rank
with the title of faujdár, and soon afterwards Todar Mal, Akbar's
finance minister, was depated by his master to create an imperial
demesne by confiscating territory from the various States of the



Mián History.
. 91
Kángra group. He annexed a large portion of the Kángra Valley
and made a similar demand on each of the other States proportionate
to their means. In presenting this report to his royal master Todar
Mal is said to have made use of the metaphor that he had “ taken
the meat and left the bone," meaning that he had annexed the
fertile tracts and abandoned only the bare hills to the Hill chiefs.
To ensore the fidelity of the Hill Rájás, Akbar adopted the policy
of retaining' as hostages at his court å prince from each of the
States, and we learn that in the beginning of Jahangir's reign there
were 22 young princes from the Punjab Hills in attendance on the
emperor. It was about this time that the title of Mían came into
use. How it originated and what was its exact signification, we do
not know, but, traditionally it is believed to have been first con-
ferred by Jahángír on the young chiefs at the Mughal court. In
Chamba it first. occurs in the form! Mie' on a copper plate deed
1613 of Rájá Bala Bhadra (A. D. 1589-1641), as one of the titles of
his son and heir, Janárdan. From that time its use seems to have
spread till it came to be applied to all the descendants of the 22 noble
families of the Hindu Hill States.
For nearly 200 years from the time of their subjection by Akbar the
Hill chiefs were tributary to the empire, but all accounts agree that
the Mughal authority sat very lightly on them. Their prerogatives
were seldom questioned and there was no interference in their
internal administration. Indeed through the whole period of Mughal
supremacy the chiefs seem to have experienced liberal and even
generous treatment. They were left very much to themselves in
the government of their principalities and were allowed to exercise
the functions and wield the power of independent sovereigns. They
built forts and waged war on one another without any reference to the
emperor and sometimes even asked and received assistance in men
and arms from the Mughal viceroy. On his accession each chief had
to acknowledge the supremacy of the emperor by the payment
of the fee of investiture, after which he received a sanad or patent
of installation, with a dress of honour from the imperial court. A
yearly tribute of four lakhs of rupees, called peshkash was exacted
from the Kangſa States in the reign of Shah Jahán. In letters and
other documents the chiefs were addressed as 'Zamindár,' the title
of Rájá being conferred only as a personal distinction. There
seems to have been much friendly intercourse between them and
the imperial court, as is proved by the letters and valuable presents
received from the emperors and still in the possession of many
of the old royal families. Some of the chiefs, too, gained a high place
in the imperial favour and were given mansab or military rank in
the Mughal army and advanced to important offices in the adminis-
tration. In one instance an important military enterprise was ontrust-
ed to a Hill chief-Rájá Jagat Singh of Núrpur who in A. D. 1645
was sent by Shah Jahan with a force, in which were 14,000 Rájputs
raised in his own country and paid by the emperor, against the
Usbegs of Balkh and Badakhshán. Speaking of this expedition,
Elphinstone, the historian, says :-*" The spirit of the Rajputs Dover
showed more brilliantly than in this unusual duty; they stormed
mountain passes, made forcad marches over snow, constructed redoubts



92
Mián History.
by their own labour, the Rájá himself taking an axe like the rest
and bore up against the tempests of that frozen region as frmly as
against the fierce and repeated attacks of the enemy. Jagat Singh's
health was fatally impaired by these hardships and he returned to
Pesháwar only to die. His father Rájá Básu and his brother Suraj
Mal both held military rank in the Mughal army, and his own
mansab at the time of his death was 3,000 with 2,000 horse. Rájá Jagat
Singh first served under Jahángír in Bengal and in the emperor's
13th year was recalled and received a mansab of 1,000 with 500
horse, the title of Rájá and a present, and was sent to assist in the
siege of Kárgļa fort. In the reign of Shah Jahan he was appointed
faujdár of Bangash (Kurram and Kohát), and two years later was
sent to Kábul. From there he went with the imperial army to
Kandahár and had command of the vanguard : returning to Lahore
he was further honoured by the emperor and again appointed to
Bangash. Not long afterwards for some reason not fuHy known he,
on coming back to Núrpur, rebelled against the emperor, in conjunction
with his son Rájráp Singh. For six months they bravely defended
the strong forts of Mau, Núrpur and Tárágaſh against the whole
power of the Mughals, and on their unconditional surrender in
March 1642 they were at once forgiven and restored to all their
honours. Rájrúp Singh accompanied his father on the above
mentioned expedition and he, as well as his son, Mandháta, also
held bigh rank in the Mughal army, the latter having been twice
appointed faujdár of Bámián and Ghorband in the reiga of Aurangzeb.
Rájá Prithwi Singh of Chamba (1641-64) also held the mansab of
1,000 with 400 horse, and it seems probable that his son apd grandson
enjoyed a similar distinction. They were also the recipients of valu-
able presents from the Mughal court.
In A. D. 1752 the Hindu Hill States came under the control of the
Durráni kings of Kábul, having been ceded along with the rest of the
Punjab to Ahmad Shah Durráni by his namesake the emperor Ahmad
Sháh of Delhi. Under Ahmad Shah, Rájá Gbamand Chand of Kángra
was appointed governor of Jullundur and the bills between the Sutlej
and the Rávi. The Rájás of Chamba and Jammu seem also to have
enjoyed the favour of the Durrápi kings. Sikh influence began to be
felt in the hills about A. D. 1764, and in 1770, Jassa Singh, Rámgarhia,
invaded Kángra and made several of the States, including Kángra and
Chamba, tributary. His power was of brief duration for in 1776 he
was defeated by Jai Singh, Kanhíya, who then became the sovereign
of most of the Kángra States. In 1785.6 Jai Singh was in turn
defeat-d in the plains by a combination, aided by Rájă Sansár Chand
of Kángra; and being compelled to withdraw from the hills he
abandoned to Sansár Chand the Kángra fort and the rich valley,
along with the sovereignty of the eleven States of the Kángra group.
In 1806 the Gurkhas invaded Kángra and in 1809, being unable to
drive them ont, Sansár Chand appealed to Mahárája Ranjit Singh for
help. This was given, but as its price the Kángộa fort fell into the
hands of the Sikhs, the greater part of the valley was also annexed,
and at the same time all the Kángra States became tributary to
Lahore. .



Mián History.
93
Jammu was first invaded in 1774 by Charat Singh, the head of the
Sukarchakia misl and grandfather of Ranjit Singh, and most of the
States of the Dugar group had become tributary to the Sikhs before
1786, and were finally subdued by Ranjit Singh about 1808-09. With
the rise of Maharaja Ranjít Singh to power the Hill States fell upon
evil days. Had he been content to treat them as feudatories it would
have been no great hardship, for they had been in subjection for
centuries. But this did not meet the designs which he soon began to
disclose, and they involved the entire, destruction of the principalities
of the hills. Jammu was the first to feel the weight of his hand. It
was invaded and reduced in 1810, and again in 1812, and finally in
1816, the ruling chief was removed from power and driven into exile,
the country being annexed to the Sikh kingdom. After a long
residence in British territory his, the sevior branch of the Jamwal
family, returned to the Punjab in 1844 and was assigned a jágír at
Akhrota in Gurdaspur which is still held by the family. Guler was
the first of the Kángra States to fall. In 1813-14 the Rájá was sum-
moned to Lahore, arrested and compelled to surrender his principality
and accept a jágír of Rs. 20,000. These lands are still held by the
family, whose bead resides at Harípur, the ancient capital of the State.
He is the first Viceregal Darbári in the Kángra District.
At the end of 1815 a great assembly of the Sikh army was convened
at Sialkot to which all the Hill chiefs were summoned. The Rájás of
Nárpur and Jaswan failed to attend, and upon them a fine was deliber-
ately imposed which it was beyond their ability to pay. The Rájá of
Jaswán quietly surrendered his State on receiving a jágír of Rs. 12,000
a year, Rájá Bír Singh of Núrpur was cast in a firmer mould. He did
his utmost to meet the unjust demand, even to the mortgage and sale
of his family idols and sacrificial vessels of silver and gold. But even
these did not suffice and he was sent back to his capital from Lahore
and compelled to surrender his kingdom. A jágír was offered which
he indignantly declined. For years he struggled against a pitiless foe,
but all to no purpose, and in 1846, after the defeat of the Sikhs at
Sobraon, he led an army against the Núrpur fort, and died before its
walls in a last vain attempt to recover his kingdom. His descendants
reside near Núrpur in the enjoyment of a small jágir granted by the
British Government. The present head of the family is an Honorary
Magistrate in Núrpur.
The small State of Shahpur, held by a branch of the Núrpur family,
was annexed by Jai Singh Kanhíya in 1781, and the ruling family now
resides at Sujánpur near Mád hopur, on a small pension. As already
atated this family is Muhammadan, being descended from the younger
son of Rájá Jagat Singh of Núrpur.
The subordinate chiefship of Kotila, originally ruled by a branch of
the Pathánia family, was seized towards the end of the 18th century
br Dhián Singh, wazir of Guler, who held it till 1811, when it was
conquered and annexed by the Sikhs.
The Datárpur State was forcibly annexed in 1818 on the demise of
the ruling chief, a jágír being granted to his son. The present head
of this family resides at Pirthipur in Hoshiárpur. Sí a would have
endered heyond their upon them at the Rajkened



Mián History.
shared the same fate as Datárpor, but for the fact that two princesses
of the family had been married to Rájá Dhián Singh, minister of
Ranjit Singh. The state was made a jágir, is still in the possession
of the family, whose head resides at Dada-Siban. In the same manner
Kutlebr was overturned in 1825. On the approach of the Sikh army
the Rájá retired to a strong fort where he held out for two months
and finally surrendered on the promise of a jágír of Rs. 10,000 which
is still enjoyed by the family. The present Rájá resides at Kotlehr
and is the 5th Viceregal Darbári in Kangra. He exercises Criminal
and Civil powers in the talúka of Kotlebr.
Kángra itself was almost the last of the Kángra group of States to
be overturned. Rájá Sansár Chand died in December 1823, having
been a vassal of Ranjit Singh since 1809 and Anirudh Chand, his son,
was allowed to succeed on payment of a heavy fee of investiture, but
the extinction of this ancient principality was near at hand. On
the occasion of a visit to Lahore in 1827 Anirudh Chand was pressed
by Ranjit Singh to consent to the marriage of his two sisters to Híra
Singh, son of Raja Dhián Singh. The proposal was abhorrent to hiin
but he feigned acquiescence and asked permission to return home to
make arrangements. On reaching Nádaun, his capital, he collected all his
moveable property, and taking his sisters with him abandoned home
and country rather than submit to the dishonour, as be esteemed it, of
such an alliance. By immemorial custom the daughter of a raling
chief may marry no one of lower rank than her father. Anirudh
Chand was the descendant of a long line of kings, while Dhián Singh
was a. Rájá only by favour of his master. He, too, was a Rajput of
noble descent and ancient lineage, and next to Ranjit Singh the most
powerful man in the Punjab, whose favour was altogether desirable.
But all this counted for nothing in the estimation of the proud Katoch
when weighed against the sacrifice of his family honour. On hearing
of Anirudh's flight Ranjit Singh was much enraged and at once sent
an army to annex the State. Ludhar Chand, cousin of Anirudh Chand,
remained behind to receive the Sikhs and also gave a daughter in
marriage to Híra Singh, for which & jáyir was conferred upon him.
Anirudh Chand died in exile and his son, Ranbír Chand, returned in 1833
and received from Ranjit Singh a jágír of Rs. 50,000. Kullu was the last
State of the Kángra group to be overthrown, but the story of its fall is too
long to be told here. Suffice to say that it was invaded by a Sikh army
in 1839 and finally annexed in 1840. The Rájá fled across the Sutlej
and died in exile. Some years later a jágir in Waziri Rúpi was assigned
to the ruling family wbich still holds it. The present head of the
family resides at Sultánpur in Kullu.
Chamba, Mandi and Suket, more fortunate than the others, succeeded
in weathering the storm, though more than once in imminent danger of
destruction, and they still rank among the Native States of the Punjab.
Chamba was saved chiefly through the influence of Nathu, wazir of
the State, who stood high in favoar with Ranjit Singh.
The later bistory of Jammu and the other States of the Dugar group
is indissolubly linked with the fortunes of three brothers, representing
a younger branch of the Jamwal clan. These were Galáb Singh, Dhián
Singh and Suchet Singh. About 1810 Guláb Singh having quarrelled



Mián History.
95
with his oousin, the then Rájá of Jammu, retired to Lahore and entered
tbe service of Ranjit Singh. His two brothers soon followed him. They
too obtained appointments in the Sikh army and were advanced to
positions of influence. Guláb Singh quickly l'ose to independent
command and was chiefly employed in quelling outbreaks among the
chiefs of the Jammu and Kashmir Bills. As a reward for these ser-
vices he was in 1820 raised to the rank of Rájá and received the Jammu
State, from which the elder branch of the clan had recently been ex-
pelled, as a fief. Dhián Singh, the second brother, was in 1818 promot-
ed to the important post of deorhiwála, or Lord Chamberlain, a position
of great influence, as it rested with him to grant or refuse admis-
sion to the Mahárája's presence. Soon after 1882 he too received the
title of Rájá, and the Punch State, then recently annexed, was con-
ferred upon him. In 1828 he became chief minister, an office which he
continued to hold till his death in 1843. He spent all his time at
Lahore near the Mahárája's person, pushing and safeguarding the in-
terests of his family while his two brothers were actively engaged in
the field. The third brother, Suchet Singh, was a courtier and a brave
and dashing soldier, with little predilection for diplomacy and affairs
of State, in which he seldom intermeddled. He too was made a Rájá
soon after his brothers, and the Rámnagar State, called Behandrálta,
from which the ruling family had been expelled, was given him as a fief.
On becoming Rájá of Jammu, Guláb Singh at once began to extend
bis power by the annexation of the other bill states, nominally for the
Sikhs, but really for himself. The first to fall were Mánkot and
Kashtwar in 1820-21. In each case the ruling chief was expelled
from bis territory. The head of the Mánkoția family now resides at
Salangri, near Kotlehr, in Kángļa. The late Rájá, Balbir Singh was
Risáldár-Major in the 13th Bengal Cavalry, and served in the Afgbán
and Egyptian Wars, for both of which he held decorations. It seenis
to have been by Ranjit Singh's direct orders that Kashtwar was an.
nexed. The Rájá had afforded an asylum to the exiled king of Kábul,
Sbáh Shujá, after his flight from Lahore in 1815, and this was never
forgiven. Guláb Singh went with a force to Doda and the Rájá on
coming there to meet him was at once made a prisoner and sent to
Lahore. Raujit Singh promised to reinstate him but never did so, and
three years afterwards he was poisoned by his own servant. The
present head of the family resides at Tilokpur in Kángra.
:
.
:
Behandrálta was annexed in 1822, and the head of the family has
long, resided at Shahzádpur in the Ambála District. The Rájá óf.
Cbaneni had assisted Guláb Singh against Kashtwar and in 1822 was
rewarded by being deposed and his State was annexed. He appealed
to Ranjít Singh and obtained permission to reside in his own territory.
The present Rájá lives at Chaneni in the enjoyment of a jágír and is
related to the Jammu family by marriage. In 1835-6 the last Rájá of
Basohli died without issue and the state was quietly annexed to Jammu.
About the same time or shortly afterwards the same fate befell the
small states of Jasrota and Sámba.
The Sámba family is now extinct in the direct line but many collateral
branches of it, as well as of the Balauria family, still remain. The
present head of the Jasrota family resides at Khanpur near Nagrota in



96
Mián History.
Jammu. Bhadu, the second state held by the Balauria family, became
extinct by its annexation to Jammu in 1840-41 and the present Rájá
lives at Tilokpur near Kotila in Kángra. Bhadrawáh, the third of the
Balauria States, was annexed by Chamba in 1820-21, and the ruling
family has long been extinct in the direct line. In 1846 the country
was transferred to Jammu.
On the conclusion of the 1st Sikh War the treaty of peace, concluded
at Lahore on 9th March 1846, transferred to the British Govern-
ment in perpetual sovereignty the Jullundur Doáb and the hill country
between the Sutlej and the Beás.
A war indemnity of a crore and a half of rapees was also demand-
ed, and the Sikh Darbar being unable to meet this demand agreed to
cede the hill country between the Beas and Indus as the equivalent of
one crore, promising to pay the rest in cash. By a separate treaty
on 11th March the British Government brought itself under an ob-
ligation to respect the bona fide rights of the dispossessed hill chiefs.
On March 16th a treaty was concluded at Amritsar between the British
Government and Guláb Singh of Jammu, transferring to him in perpe-
tual possession all the hill country between the Rávi and the Indus,
on payment by him of £750,000 to Government. In making over these
territories the Government by a special clause in the treaty imposed
upon Rájá Guláb Singh the obligation they had come under as regards
the rights of the dispossessed chiefs and the latter were at the same
time given the option of remaining in or leaving Jammu territory.
Most of them preferred the latter alternative, and Government then
became responsible for the payment of their annuities. To meet this
charge Mahárája Gulab Singh ceded vertain land near Pathankot to
Government in perpetaity, and the dispossessed chiefs of the Dugar
group of States, therefor draw their pensions, which are in most cases
small, direct from Government. One or two other incidents may be
related in connection with the States of the Kangſa.group. The trans-
fer of hill territory to Mahárája Guláb Singh included Chamba, but
an arrangement was afterwards made, through Sir Henry Lawrence,
by which the Jammu State acquirod the districts of Lakhanpur and
Bhadrawah in lieu of Chamba, which thus came directly under the
control of the British Governinent. Though not connected with the
present narrative it may also be menticned that in 1847 Mahárája
Guláb Singh surrendered the territory between the Jhelum Sind the
Indus now forming the Hazára District to the Sikh Darbár, receiving
in exchange territory of half the value nearer Jammu. The territory
between the Sutlej and the Rávi in the hills in which all the States of
the Kangra group were situated came under the direct control of the
British Goveroment in March 1846, but the transfer was not affected
without difficulty. Relying on its ancient prestige the Sikh Commander
of the Kángra Fort refused to yield up his trust, and a force including
a battery of artillery had to be sent froni Ludhiana, then a military
station, to coerce him into surrender, which was done qply after a siege
of two months. The commandant of the Kotila Fort also held out for
some time. The dispossessed chiefs also did not willingly own alle-
giance to their new rulers. They had long been looking forward to
the coming of the British and the generous treatment extended to the



Mián History.
97
states east of the Sutlej, in 1816 when the chiefs were all reinstated in
their principalities on the expulsion of the Gurklas, encouraged them
to believe that in their case also the same procedure would be followed.
Great then was their disappointment on learning that such was not
the case, and that the new paramount power meant to retain in its
own hands all that the Sikhs had won. They all became disaffected
in consequence, and when they were approached by the Sikh leaders
in the early summer of 1848, and incited to join in the rebellion which
was then maturing, they lent a willing ear to these overtures. They
were promised that, in the event of the British being expelled from the
Punjab, their states would be restored. In August 1848 Rám Singh,
son of the late wazír of Núrpur, gathered a force and seizing the
Shahpur Fort on the Rávi, proclaimed Jaswant Singh, son of the re.
doubtable Bir Singh as Rájá of Núrpur. A British force was sent
against him and on its approach he evacuated the fort and took up a
strong position, on the hills near Núrpur which was captured by storm.
He then fled to the Sikh Army in the plains. In January 1849 while
the second Sikh War was in progress Rám Singh again appeared in
the hills. He entrenched himself on the Dalla-ká-Dhár, one of
the outer ranges of the Siwaliks, which was stormed with considerable
loss, two young Europeans being anong the killed. Rám Singh was
afterwards taken and banished to Singapore where he died, but to the
present day his exploits are narrated with pride and commemorated in
song. In November 1848 the Rájás of Kángra, Jaswan and Datarpur
also rose in rebellion but they were quickly defeated, captured and
banished to Almora. There the senior branch of the Kángra family
became extinct and the present Rájá is descended from Mián Fateh
Chand, younger brother of Rájá Sansár Chand. He resides at Lamba-
graon near Nádaun in the enjoyment of a jágír of Rs. 35,000. He has
the honorary rank of Major in the 37th Doyras and served in the
Chital campaign. He is an Honorary Magistrate in bis júgir and
second Viceregal Darbári in the District. The Rájá of Jaswan was
permitted to return from Almora about 1855 and was granted a
jágír by Mahárája Guláb Singh at Rámkot jü Jammu. In 1877 his
former jagir in Jaswan was also restored. The present head of the
family resides at Amb in Jaswán and is related by marriage to the
Mahárája of Jammu and Kashmír.
The Rájá of Datarpur was allowed to come back from Kumaun at a
later date and resides at Pirthipur in Hoshiárpur on a small pension..
Most of the chiefs of the Kángļa group of States reside in their
ancestral homes and among their own people, and though their authority
as'ruling princes has long since passed away, they are still regarded
witb feelings of deep respect and devotion by their former subjects.
The chiefs of the Dugar group have been less fortunate and most of
them are exiled from their ancient patrimonies and live in British
territory. Some of the chiefs have risen to positions of honour and
distinction in the army and the imperial service, and it is to be re-
gretted that they do not more frequently seek an outlet in this way
for their energies and talents. For the most part it is to be feared
that they lead aimless lives, courting a dignity, which they have
not the means to maintain and dreaming of a past which can never



98
Mián History.
any other les more ancient of the western
return. The story of their fall is a pathetic one and the pathos
is rendered keener by the many local traditions current in the hills
and entwined with the memory of the old chiefs. Some of the
States so ruthlessly destroyed were among the oldest that the
world has ever known. We may question the claim of the Katoch
Rájás of Kángļa to a pedigree dating from the time of Mabábhárat,
but there can be little doubt that their kingdoin was founded some
centuries before the Christian era. There are few, if any, royal
families in the world that can, trace their descent through such a
long period. To seek a parallel we naturally turn to the Rájput States
of Rajputána. Mewár or Udaipur, the oldest of them, came into
the possession of the present ruling family in A. D. 721, and all
the other principalities are of much later date, some having been
founded in comparatively recent times. · Contrasting them with the
Kațoch family of Kángra Sir A. Cunningham said :-" The royal
family of Jullundur and Kángra is one of the oldest in India and
their genealogy from the time of the founder, Susarma Chandra,
appears to me to have a much stronger claim on our belief than
any of the long strings of names now shown by the more powerful
families of Rájpútána." . Again in the Census Report of 1881 Sir
Denzil Ibbetson* wrote of the Rájput dynasties of the western
Himalaya as possessing genealogies' more ancient and unbroken
than can be shown by any other royal families in the world. They
have thus good reason to be proud of their ancient descent. The
ancestors of some of them were ruling over settled States when ours
were little better than sayages, and many of them can point, to a
pedigree dating back for 1,000 years. In comparison with them most
of the ruling houses of the plaius are but as of yesterday, and
the very oldest of these must yield precedence for antiquity of lineage
to. some of the noble families of the Punjab Hills. On 15th March
1909, His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor-General was pleased
to copfer the title of Rájá as a hereditary distinction upon Colonel
Jai Chand, jágírdár of Law bagraon; Jai Singh, jagirdár of Síba ;
Narindar Chand, jágirdár of Nádaun ; Rám Pál, jagirdár of. Kutlehr ;
and Gaggan Singh, jágírdár of Núrpur, all in the Kángļa District.
This distinction had previously been conferred on Rájá Raghunath
Singh of Güler.
The form of salutation among the Mián is jaidiya of which the.
original in Sanskrit was Jayatu Deota, meaning “ May the king be
..victcrious." It is thus very wuch the same as “long live the kig.”
It was formerly offered only to a ruling chief or a scion of his
family and could not be assumed by a Rajput of lower degree
without proper sanction. Occasionally a chief, being the head of
the clan, might confer the privilege of using the jaidiya on others
than the members of the royal clan but unauthorised assumption of
the title was punished with fine and imprisonment. By a ruling
chief or the head of a royal clan it is received and not returned
unless when ofiered by an equal in rank or an heir-apparent. Among
Mians of the first rank below the chief it is freely interchanged, the
inferior in rank offering the salutation first, and when accorded to
them by others of inferior social rank : whether Rájputs or, those
of lower castes, the salutation Rám Rám is given in return...



99
Mián prejudices.
A distinction is made by some Miáns between those who do and
those who do not follow the plough, the salutation being accorded only
to the latter and denied to the former even when of noble de-
scent. This distinction is not now so marked as in former times,
for the force of circumstances has compelled many Míáns to resort
to agriculture for a living.
Mr. Barnes in the Kángra Settlement Report relates the following
incident which show the great importance formerly attached to the
jaidiya. Rájá Dhián Singh, the Sikh minister, himself a Jamwal
Míán, desired to extort the jaidiya from Rájá Bír Singh, the fallen
chief of Núrpur. He held in his possession the grant of a jágír
valued at Rs. 25,000 duly signed and sealed by Ranjit Singh and
delayed presenting the deed until the Núrpur chief should hail him
with this coveted salutation. But Bír Singh was a Rájá by a long
line of ancestors, and Dhián Singh was a Rájá only by favour of Ranjít
Singh. The hereditary, chief refused to compromise his honour, and
preferred beggary to affluence · rather than accord the jaidiya to one
who by the rules of the brotherhood was his inferior.
Considerable modifications in the popular use of the jaidiya have
taken place in recent years and many now receive the honour who
formerly would not have been entitled to it. l'he Míáus themselves
however adhere to ancient custom in the use of their honorific salutation.
| Mr. Barnes has the following remarks about the exclusive habits
of the Miáns in Kángra, 50 years ago.“ A Mián, to preserve his name
and honour unsullied, must scrupulously observe four fundamental
maxims :---Firstly, he roust never drive the plough ; secondly, he
must never give his daughter in marriage to an inferior, nor marry
himself much below his rank; thirdly, he must never accept money
in exchange for the betrothal of his daughter, and lastly, his female
household must observe strict seclusion. The prejudice against the
plough is perhaps the most inveterate of all : that step can never be
recalled. The offender at once loses the privileged salutation, he is
reduced to the second grade of Rajputs : no Míán will marry his
daughter, he must go a step lower in the social scale to get å wife
for himself. In every occupation of life he is made to feel his degraded
position. In meetings of the tribe and at marriages the Rájputs
undefiled by the plough will refuse to sit at meals with the halbah
or plough driver as he is contemptnously styled, and many to avoid
the indigoity of exclusion never appear at public assemblies. The
prejudice against driving the plough is common to Brahipans as well as
Rajputs and three chief reasons are assigned by the people for it. Some
say it is sacrilegious to lacerate the earth with an iron plough.share.
Others consider that the offence is in subjecting oxen to labour and
driving them with the goad; probably, the real reason is that such labour
is regarded as menial, and fit only for people of lower castes. In many
if not most cases the objection applies only to driving the plongh, all
other forms of farm service being freely engaged in. The actual
ploughing is done by men of low caste residing in or near the village.
"The giving of one's daughter to an inferior in ceste is scarcely a
more unpardonable offence than agriculture. Even Ranjít Singh in the
height of his prosperity and power felt the force of this prejudice. The



100
Miáná.
Rájá of Kángra deserted his hereditary kingdom rather than ally his
sisters to Dhián Singh, himself a Mián of the Jammu stock, but not the
equal of the Kațoch prince. The Rájputs of Kotgarh, in the Núrpur
pargana, voluntarily set fre to their houses and immolated their female
relatives to avoid the disgrace of Ranjit Singh's alliance, and when
Mián Padmá, a renegade Páthaniá, married his daughter to the Sikh
monarch, his brethren, undeterred by the menaces of Ranjit Singh,
deprived him and his immediate connections of the jaidiya and to this
day refuse to associate with his descendants. The seclusion of their
women is also maintained with severe strictness. The dwellings of
Rájputs can always be recognised by one familiar with the country:
The houses are placed in isolated positions. Either on the crest of a
hill which commands the approaches on all sides, or on the verge of a
forest sedulously preserved to form an impenetrable screen. Where
natural defences do not exist, an artificial growth is protnoted to afford
the necessary privacy. In front of their dwellings removed 6fty paces
frm the house, stands the mandi or vestibule beyond whose precincts
no one inconnected with the household can venture to, intrude. A
privileged stranger who has business with the master of the house may
by favour occupy the vestibule, but even this concession is jealously
guarded, and only those of decent caste and respectable character are
allowed to come even as far as the mandi. A remarkable instance of
the extremes to which the seclusion is carried occurred under my own
experiences.
"A Katoch's house in Mandi territory accidently caught fire in broad
day. There was no friendly wood to favour the escape of the women
and rather than brave the public gaze they kept their apartments
and were sucrificed to a horrible death. Those who wish to visit their
parents must travel in covered palanquins and those too poor to afford
à conveyance travel by night, taking upfrequented roads through
thickets and ravines.”
The above remarks apply chiefly to Kangra where the Rájputs are
much more tenacious of ancient custom than in other parts of the
hills. The restrictions of former times are now much relaxed.
Mr. Barnes also draws a pathetic picture of the condition of many of
the Míán families fifty years ago soon after the establishment of
British rule in the hills. Too proud to follow the plough they often
had great difficulty in eking out a living and had to resort to many
shifts to support themselves and their families. That picture is no
longer true to life, times have changed for the better, and even when
unwilling to follow the plough the Míáns have many other avenues of
work open to them, and considerable numbers enter the army and other
departinents of Government service. Not a few have given up their
prejudice against following the plough, and become keen agriculturists,
while the profits derived from land are much greater than they were
fifty years ago, so that the poorest of them now live in comparative
comfort.
Miáná, (1) a nickname of Játs, Panjabi Dicty., p. 756 ; (2) the descendant of a
Mián (1); but in Hazára at least, and probably in other parts of the frontier,
any new convert to Islám is often called a Míáná, and many of them are
cultivators; (3) Miáná, Míáni a branch of the Saraban division of the



be prindeling and add then he same namene, pero
Midngan-Michan Khel.
101
Patháns, descended from Miánai, son of Sharkhahún and brother of
Sherán, Tarín, and others. Miánai had 13 sons, of whom one, a Sayyid,
was adopted by him. They were Ghornai or Ghorai, Laupai or Lúnai,
Mulhai or Mulai, Las, Salách, Tsoț, Shkorn, Lawánai or Nawánai,
Ralwánai, Togh, JA'FAR, Momit and GHARSHIN, the Sayyid. Shkorn's
two sons founded two septs, the ZMARI and KIHTRÁN. The Miána were
originally settled, like other Afgháns, among the hills and valleys
springing from the Kasighar, Shumnál, etc.
MIÁNGAN, a clan found in the Mohmand tappa of Pesháwar tabsíl.
Mían Kael, a Pathán tribe found in Dera Ismáíl Khán. Their country has an
area of 256 square miles, and lies between the Gundápur and the
Bábar Guntry. The Mián Khels are one of the tribes of Loháni
Pawin ahs, who settled in the Damán in the 16th century. Along with
the Daulat Khels, they first settled in Tank, but soon moved south to
their present quarters, which they seized after conquering the Sarwánis
and other original inhabitants. They were assisted in this by the
Bakhtiyar tribe, to whom they gave a share in the lands acquired. The
Bahktiyárs are now compl-tely incorporated with the Mián Khels, and
form one of their inain sections. The Mián Khels never completely
gave up their Pawindah life, and, while a portion of the tribe is settled
at Drában and Musazai, the greater number of them still trade is
before between India and Khorásán. They are the richest of all tha
Pawindahs, and deal in tho more costly descriptions of merchandise.
The trading and land. holding Mián Khels do not form altogether distinct
classes. Now and then & leading camindár takes an excursion to
Kábul or Bokhára. In the same way many of the trading Mián Khels
have proprietary rights in the Damán, where their lands are looked
after during their absence by relations. They are a peaceable tribe,
and good looking, often with ruddy complexions. They dress and
live better than most of the Pawindah and Damán tribes, and are
altogether more civilised. They seldom take military service. The
plain Míán Khels are divided into those of Drában and those of Músazai.
The bulk of the tribe lives at Drában, and owns rather more than three-
fourths of the whole Mián Khel country. The Músazais live in the
town of that name and own the south-west portion of the tract. They
are also called Músá Khel.
Miáni, a Pathán tribe of Dera Ismáíl Khán, allied to the plain Míánis of the
Gúmal valley, near whom they reside during the winter. They only
number some 400 men.
Míchan Kael, a sept of Patháns, said to be Sarhang Niázis, and certainly
Niázis. They are, however, now affiliated to the Marwats. Descended
from Shaikh Míchan, a descendant of Niázai, son of Lodai, who was a
saint of the Afgháns and whose real narge was Mohsin, the Míchan are
reputed to possess charms against snake-bite and hydrophobia. Háji
Murid, a descendant of Míchan, is a saint of great repute, and his
tomb is on the bank of the Kurram near Lakki. Míchan himself is
baried at Wáno in the hills of Wazíristán. His name is said to mean
• dirty,' but according to Raverty it is stated in his ' Life' that in his
yonth he was devoted to the chase, to wandering in the valleys and on
the hills. Once in his wanderings the Almighty caused & miraculous



102
Midári-Mina.
gust of wind to blow upon him, which affected him in such wise that he
became a frenzied enthusiast, and filled with religious fervour. Hav.
ing recovered a little from its effects, he went his way homewards.
Some persons who saw him returning in this state of mental disturb-
ance and apparently bereft of his senses, remarked to vihers that 't.
day this man has been turning and twising about lika a hand-mill-
méchan.' He devoted himself to a religious life, and worked many
miracles. Muhsin the Míchan is generally said to have been 6th in
descent from Kháko, son of Niázi, son of Ibrahím Lodai.
MIDári, see Madári.
MID, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur...,
MIHÁN SÁHibs, a Sikh sect founded by one Rámdewa who used to draw.
water for the Guru Tegh Bahadur's followers and horses. Seeing his
zeal the Gurú one day said: 'Brother, you pour water like the rain
(minh).' Thenceforward he was styled Mihán and the Gurú invested
him with a seli (a woollen cord) or hair necklace, a cap (topi), a drum
(ringára) and the gift of apostleship. Thus he became a sách and
made converts. When Tegh Bahadur became, Gurú, Rámdewa went
to Anandpur, but, liearing his drum, the Gurú bade his followers take
it away. Rámdewa nevertheless brought an offering to the Gurú who
asked him if he cared nothing for the loss of his drum. Rámdewa
replied: 'It is thine, thou hast given and thou hast taken away. The
Gurú gave him half his own turban and the title of Mihán Sáhib, and
also returned his drum. The mahant of the sect.still wears half a
turban and his followers are also called Bakhshish sidhs from bakhsh
(the ' gift? of apostleship). They have a dera at Patiala.*
MIHMÁR, see Ráj.
MIHR, -í, seu Mehra.
MIHRMAMA, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MJETAR: (1) the title of the ruler of Chitral, whose clan is thence called the
Mihtari gaum ; (2) a title ; headman of a caste; a Chahşá; fem. -Ní, -ÁNÍ.
See also under Megh. In the second sense the word appears to be
derived from mahattara, chief : cf. mahattama and Mahtam.
MIJA KHEL, & Pathán sept.
MILOTBA, & Rájput clan found in Sialkot. :)
Mína, a caste which is, in the Punjab at least, almost invariably criminal..
in Alwar and Jaipur however, the States of Rájputána in which their
· home lies, this does not appear to be the case. Indeed Jaipur is said to
be really made up of petty Mína States, now under the chieftaincy of
the Kachwaha Rajputs.' In Gurgaon the Mida cultivates land, but
this does not prevent his being a professional thief. The following
description of the caste is taken from Major Powlett's Gazetteer of
Alwar:
"Minas were formerly the rulers of much of the country now held by the Jaipur Chief.
They still hold a good social position, for Rájputs will eat and drink from their hands, and
:
* The Phúl Sahib dhuán of the Odásís is also called Mián Sáhib. It is said to bave its
shrines (deras) at Bahadurpur and Chiníghá lí in Hoshiarpur. Is there any connection
between the Mibán Sáhibs and the Phúl Sáhib dhuán of the Udásís ?



The criminal Minds.
103
they are the most trusted guards in the Jaipur State. The Mínas are of two classes, the
* Zamíndárí,' or agricultural, and the Chaukidári,' or watchmen. The former are excel.
lent cultivators, and are good, well.behaved people. They form a large portion of the
population in Karauli, and are numerous in Jaipur.
“ The Chaukidári' Mínas, though of the same tribe as the other class, are distinct from
it. They consider themselves soldiers by profession, and so somewhat superior to their
agricultural brethren, from whom they take, but do not give, girls in marriage. Many of
the Chaukidári' Minas tako to agriculture, and, I believe, thereby lose caste to some
extent. These Chaukidári Minas are the famous marauders. · They travel in bands, headed
by a chosen leader, as far south as Haidarabád in the Deccan, where they commit daring
robberies : and they are the principal class which the Thaggi and Dacoity Suppression De-
partment has to act agaiust. In their own villages they are often charitable; and as
successful plunder has made some rich, they benefit greatly the poor of their neighbourhood,
and are consequently popular. But those who have not tho enterprise for distant expedi.
tions, but'steal and rob near their own homes, are numerous and are felt to be a great pest.
Some villages pay them highly as Chaukidárs to refrain from plundering and to protect the
village from others. So notorious are they as robbers that the late Chief of Alwar, Banni
Zingh, was afraid lest they should corrupt their agricultural bretbren, and desirous of
keeping them apart forbade their marrying, or even smoking or associating with members
of the well-conducted class.
“In April 1863, Major Impey, then Political Agent of Alwar, issued orders placiug the
Chaukidári Mínas. under surveillance; and under Major Cadell's direction lists of them have
been made out, periodical roll-call enforced in the villages and absence without leave certi.
ficate punished.
“I am not sure that, although, speaking generally, Minas are divided into Chaukidári and
Zamíndári, there is any hard and fast line between the two classes. There is, I believe, an
intermediate class, for Mahárája Banni Singh's attempts to keep the two apart. were not
very successful.
There are said to be 32 clans of Minas. Out of 59 Mínas apprehended for dacoity by
the Dacoity Suppression Department, I found that the Jab clan furnished 17, the Kagot 9,
the Síra 8, and the Jarwál and Bágri 5 each. The Susáwat was, I believe, formerly the
most powerful clan, and that which beld Ajmer."
The Mínas of the Punjab appear in the Muhammadan histories is
Mínís or Maids. Like the Bhattis all the territories of the Mínís were
attached to Abohar in the reign of Alá-ud-Din.* Uuder Muhammad
Shah (1389-1392) we read of Rai Kamál-ud-Din Main and Rai Dáúd
Kamal Main, doubtless one and the same person, as serving with the
Bhațţi chief.t
The Mínas are the boldest of the eriminal classes in the Punjab.
Their head-quarters, so far as that Province is concerned, are the
village of Sháhjuháopur, which is a itached to Gurgaon but surrounded
on all sides by Rájputána territory.. l'here they till lately defied our
police, and even resisted them with armed force. Their enterprises
are on a largʻ scale, and they are always prepared to use violence if
necessary. In Márwár they are armed with small bows, which do
considerable execution. They travel great distances in gangs of from
12 to 20 meu, praciising robbery and dacoity even as far as the Deccan.
The gangs usually start off immediately after the Diwali feast, and
often remain absent the whole year. They have agents in all the large
cities of Rájputána and the Deccan who give them information, and
they are in league with the carrying castes of Márwár. After a :
successful foray they offer vne-tenth of the proceeds at the shrine of
Káli Devi. The criminal Minas are said to inhabit a tract of country
about 65 miles long and 40 broad, stretching from Shabpurah 40 miles
north of Jajpur to Guráora in Gurgaon on the Rohtak border, the
Niust noted villages being Koti Putli, Bhairor, and Shahjahánpur, each
* E. H. I. III, p. 272.
† Ib: IV, pp. 22, 29.



104
Miná-Minákâr.
of which contains some 500 robbers. Their claim to Rajput descent is
probably well founded, though they are said to spring from an illegiti-
mate son of a Rájput; and in woman's slang one woman is said to
“ give Mina” (mina dena) to another when she accuses her of illicit
intercourse. They practise karewa or widow-marriage. They have a
dialect of their own; or 'rather perhaps a set of slang words and
phrases which are common to the criminal classes. In the Punjab the
Mina is almost confined to Gurgaon and the neighbouring portions of
Pațiála and Nábha. They are almost all Hindas and belong to the
Chaukidári section and the Kagot clan (see further under Meo*).
In Nábha the Mínas are found in the Bawal nizámat. They claim
descent from Sangwár Tawári, a Brahman and grandson of Mir Rája
Ad. As elsewhere they are habitual thieves but if a Mina is made
chaukidár of a village no other Mina will rob it. Hence rise two
occupational groups-one of village watchmen, the other of cultivators
and the foriner will only take daughters from the latter, though they
inay smoke together. Both have septs named after the place of origin,
and in Báwal the got found is called Papri from Paproda in Jaipur.
They perform the first tonsure at Rái Sur in that State. At a betrothal
contract a barber, a Brahman and a Rána (Hindu Mirási) are sent to
the house of the boy's father. The Rána marks a tilak on his forehead,
getting Rs. 16 as his fee, the Brahman and the Nái receiving Rs. 4 with
turban and Rs. 3, respectively. The lagan is sunt shortly after. An
auspicious day is fixed by a Brahman and other ceremonies, performed.
Like all professional thieves, the Mínas are devotees of devi. Un all
occasions and even when starting on a raid, they offer her sweetmeats.
On the birth of a son they distribute food in the naine of Puna, a sati
of their family, whose shrine is at Mehrat in Jaipur and the women sing
song. They do not use the first milk of a unilch animal until some of it
has been given to the purohit and offerel to the goddess. They do not
wear kárch bangles as this was.forbidden by the sati. They eat meat
and drink liquor, worship the pipal and Sítla. They wear no janeo.
Míná, (1) a nickname given by the Sikh guris to those who pretended to
be gurús-Panjabi Dicty., p. 751; (2) a Sikh sect which owes its origin to
Pirihi Chand, the eldest son of Ráudás, the 4th Gurú, whose claim to
succeed his father was based mainly on the primitive theory that
sanctity descended in the physical sense. Orthodox Sikhs aver that
Rámdás stigmatised Pirthi Chand as Mínát or “deceitful," on account
of his unblial lack of obedience, and excluded him from the succession.
Miharbán, Pirthi Chand's son, wrote a janam sákhi of Gurú Nának,
wherein he eulogised his father. It contains the first mention of
Bhái Bála.
Mínákár, an inlayer, an enameller on silver.
* If the Minas are connected with the Meos it is, to say the least, a curious coincidence
that in Sansk. mina means 'fish,' and that Meo or Meún means 'fisherman,' .
+ Pirthi Mal, according to Trumpp, but Pirthi Chand is the more usual form of the name.
* The name of the robber tribe. in Rájputána-Macauliffe. In Maya Singh's Panjábí
Dicty., p. 751, míná is said to mean a bull or ox with horns inclined downwards along
its face; a nickname given by the Sikh Gurús to those who pretended to become Gurús,
though unfit for the noble work as míná inasandiá.



Minmin-Mírásí.
105
MINMIN, a Muhammadan shop-keeper of the Hasaní sect, the class usually
styled Khoja or Bohra in India. The term appears to be confined to
.. the Baloch tracts.*
Mír, a chief; a title given to Sayyids and also to Mirásís. See also under
Shikári.
MIRÁNA, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MÍRÁNZAI, or Malik-Míri, one of the main branches of Patháns who are
styled BANGASH.
Mírásí, fom. -AN, AMÍrási, & genealogist, fr. Arabic mirás, ' inheritance.'
The Mírási form one of those large heterogeneous bodies, varying in
status, occupation and doubtless io origin as well, which are con-
ventionally called castes in the Punjab, though they correspond to no
definition, actual or potential, of the term caste.' The best description
of their ordinary functions is the following extract from the Gujrát
Settlement Report of 1865 :-_" The duties of the Míriisis or village bards
are as follows:--To get by heart, and to be able to repeat from memory
offhand, the pedigrees of the heads of the families within the tribe. They
were always appealed to in former times in the case of any dis-
pute about hereditary property. They have to attend upon the
guests of their masters. The agricultural classes keep no household
servants but these, and would consider it infra dig. to wait upon
their own guests. They have to accompany their masters on visits
of condolence or congratulations, they summon relations from far
and near, they have to accompany the daughter going to her father-
in-law's house, or the son's wife to visit her paternal home.
The Mírási and his wife have to prepare all such things as may
be required at a marriage feast-turmeric, salt, pepper 20 days before
the wedding, to inform all relations (gand lejána), and to attend
upon them when present, also to care for all who come upon visits of
condolence, or to a funeral. The above services are obligatory, and
if refused the Mírási is turned out of the village, and his place is
supplied by another.
In exchange for their services the Mírásis receive, on 10 or 12
different occasions between the betrothal and the marriage, presents
of from eight annas to two rupoes and among the perquisites are the
shawl or other valuable cloth used as the pall at the funerals of
the better classes. When the marriage procession leaves the house of
the bride, the bridegroom distributes to all the “Mírásis, who collect
from the neighbouring villages for the purpose, from one apna to
one rupee each according to his means. Játs call this ratarchari,
and Gujars dar. The poor give one or two pice to each Mírási, called
wárah. This custom prevails still. In former days the Mírásis could
secure their perquisites by giving the recusant, a bad name, and speak-
ing disrespectfully of him. Since, however, the meeting was held for
the reduction of marriage expenses, the Mírásis are not importunate,
but accept what they can get. They are now taking to cultivation,
but, being tenants-at-will, they make little profit out of it, some have
* Longworth Dames' Text-book of Balochi, p. 38.



106
The Mirási's functions.
educated themselves and obtained service. An order was issued by
the District Officer that Mírásis should confine themselves to their own,
and not collect fees uninvited in neighbouring villages at marriages
aud funerals: this gave great relief to the community."
Ibbetson (8 527) writing of the Dúm and Mírási observed that Dúm
is the Hindu and Indian while Mírási is the Musalmán and Arabic
name (of the caste), the whole class being commonly called Dúmi-Mírási
by the people. But the collocation of the two names does not
appear to imply that the two groups are necessarily identical or even
equal. They are loosely coupled together in popular speech, just as
are Cháhrá. Chamár and Mochi-Juláhá, in a manner which only serves
to conceal the fact that the Dúm-Mirási group includes sub-groups of
varying status, It may be conjectured that the Mírási is a kind of
promoted Dúm, elevated by function above his parent group. Ibbetson
no doubt observed that the Dúms must be carefully distinguisbed from
the Doo or Domra, the executioner-and corpse-burner of Hindustan,
and the type of all uncleanliness to & Hindu ; as also from the Dúm of
the Hill States whom he classed as Dúmna and not as Mírási, the tern.
Dúm being understood to mean in the Himalayan area a worker in
bamboo. But it is probably safer to regard the Dom, Dúm, Dúmpa
and Domra are mere synonyms, all four being of pretty much the same
status, though not necessarily of the same origin. Functionally the
Mírási is certainly the Muhammadan equivalent of the Hindu Bhát.
'Even Játs,' wrote Ibbetson, employ Mírásis, though the hereditary
genealogist of many of the Ját tribes is the Sánsi, and Rájputs often
employ Mírásis in addition to Bháțs.' The Mirási,' he also said, 'is to
the inferior agricultural castes and outcast tribes what the Bhát is to the
Rájputs.' 'But,' as he pointed out, the. Mírási is more than a gene-
alogist; he is also a musician and minstrel; and most of the men who
play the musical instruments of the Punjab are either Mírásis, Jogís
or faqirs. The social position of the Mírási, as of all the minstrel
castes, is exceedingly low, but he attends at weddings and on similar
occasions to recite genealogies. Moreover there are grades even among
Mírásis.' This is eminently true. The social position of the Mírási,
like that of the Boát, depends on several factors, his function, his
origin and his means.. Like all the ciient or parasite classes the
Mirási's position varies with that of his patron, and a Mírási perma-
nently attached to a Rájput clan and beneficed by it, ranks higher than
one who is merely a strolling player or casual attendant at a Ját wed-
ding. Even the outcast tribes have their Mírásis who, though they do
not eat with their patrons and merely render thom professional service,
are considered impure by the Mírásis of the higher castes. As to the
Dúms they are entirely disavowed by the Mírásis, or at least by the real
Mírásis. Thus in Rohtak the Dúm is a Hindu who is associated with
dancing girls as a player on the tabla or the sirangi and is described
as an offshoot of the Kanás* sect (vic) who are called Dúms of Dhángs.
They are not Muhammadans. Elsewhere the Dúu is cquated with
the Kanchan. And in Gurgaon he is said to take aims only from menials
like the Jhíwar, Dakaut Clamár, Bbangi, Julábá and Dhának,
# Cf. p. 111, infra.



The story of Akása.
107
In Ders of the Balocophet, Pirs aimes used toid to be m. having when
In Dera Ghazi Khán the Dóm is also called Langá, and is said to be
the mirási of the Baloch, using the saranda and singing Balochi songs in
praise of God, the Prophet, Pírs and heroes.' The Langá also keep the
Baloch pedigrees and in former times used to accompany their masters
in war as minstrels. In Multán they are said to be mirásis of the
Dáúd potras and also Dáúdpotraś themselves by origin, having come
from Umrkot. They claim descont accordingly from Abbás. Then
again the Mírási or Dúm of Dera Ghazi Khán used to keep horse-
stallions for breeding and he still does so in the Bozdár hills. Šo too in
Gurgaon the Mírásis used to keep stallions and bulls for breeding pur-
poses, but this vocation seems to have been confined to the Naqgáls. The
Mírási's love of a horse is also noted in Lahore and horses are said to
be sometimes given him in alms. .
Mírási origins. :
The Mírásis, or at least some of them, claim an Arabian origin.
Tradition says that the Prophet had once whippod & Moslem of
Madína named Akása or Kassa and when on his death-bed he asked
that any one whom he had injured should wreak vengeance on him.
Akása demanded that the dying Prophet should bare his back, which he
kissed,* taking no other revenge. He then eulogised the Prophet and
* His object was, according to other versions, to soc the 'seal of prophery' on the
Prophet's back. One variant makes Okása a kása) & Slisikh Quraish by descent thus :-
Abdul Munáf,
Háshim.
Mutlib.
Anín,
Abdulla.
Abu Talib.
Okása.
Muhammad.
Ali.
or
Kassa.
Hasan,
Husain,
Abdul Haqq.
Abdul Ghani.
Pahar,
Bhagar.
Passi.
Wahid. Umr Dín. Kalu.
And adds that Okása's sons took refugo in the Punjab after Muhammad's defeat in tho
Khyber Pass ! while yet another version gives Kassa's (Okása's) descendants as above and
says Passi was the first to come to India from Arabia, But Dr. Horovitz points out that this
episode is not related of Ukkásha, but of one of the companions of the Prophet, Sawad Ibn
Ghaziya, regarding whom Ibn Ishág (circa 150 H.) in his Biography of the Prophet writes :
Ibn Habban Ibn Wasi has told me on the authority of old men of his tribes that when
the Prophet put the ranks of his companions strưight on the day of Badr. (anno 2 Hijra)
with an arrow in his hand he passed by Sawad Ibn Ghaziya, a client of the tribe of
Banú Adi Ibn Najjár, who was rushing forward from the lines, the Prophet stabbed the
arrow into his belly and said to him : “Stand straight." Sawad said: “You have given
me pain, o Prophet! and as God has sent you with justice, allow me to retaliate." So
the Prophet uncovered his belly and said: “Take your revenge.” Whereupon ho embraced
him and kissed his belly. When the Prophet asked him: “What makes you do this p" ho



108
Mirási origins.
his descendants followed his example by panegyrising kings and nobles
for a living. One of them, Mír, migrated to Persia and obtained the
office of nagib or herald. In that capacity his descendants Quraishi
and Básla accompanied the Khwaja Main-od-dín Chishti into India and
became the Mírásis of the Shaikhs and Sayyids. Básla was corrupted
into Posla. The naqibs and naqárchis of the Muhammadan kings
corresponded to the Dhadhis of the Hindu Rájás. According to this
account, which comes from Rohtak, the only true Mírásis are the
Quraishis, Poslas, the descendants of Mír, and the Rabábis, all of
foreign origin, and the Dhadhis who are indigenous to India.
Another variant makes the Mírásis descendants of Wahid and his
father Akása. Wábid was the slave of Abdulla, a famoas jurist
under the Caliph Umar. One day his promptitude in bringing his
master a bowl of milk earned its reward and Abdulla taught him
ribe law of inheritance and the pedigrees connected therewith, but the
profession of his descendants degenerated into mere repetition of the
latter. This tradition is current in Gujrát, as is also the following :-
When Ali came to the Prophet's house with a procession to celebrate his
nuptials with Fátima, an assembly .was held ; and according to a custom
which still obtains among Mohammadans of all creeds and nationalities,
milk was required as the first thing to be put into the bridegroom's
mouth at the brido's house. A bowl' held by an unseen hand, was
placed before the bridegroom, aud Wahid, & slave of the bride's house-
hold, held it up to the bridegroom's lips. He emptied it and the slave
asked for a reward, so Ali placed two rabies in the empty bowl, but
Wáhid asked for a more substantial and enduring gift. Ali who was
learned in the law of inheritance taught him that science and so his
descendants were called Mírásis. The kabit or song in which this
tradition is preserved runs as follows :-
Hoyá hukam Khudá-i-dá wahí jo aya pás,
Malá katorả Wahid ko làmká báp Abbát.
Parho kalmá, ákho Mominon din jo ája rás
Dhudh piláyá Shah ko jithon mili mirás.
The legend hardly deserves notice, but it is given here as showing
how daring popular invention can be, One Asa was a servant of the
Prophet who bestowed upon him the title of Mír Asa. He was after-
wards called Sultán Mír and his descendants were styled Mírán
Sayyids, whence Mírási.
Some Mírásis claim to be descendants of Kalak Dás, son of
Brahma. Kalak Dás sucked away his father's leprosy and in gratitude
Brahma bestowed upon him this boon, that he should be reverenced by
the people and that all he said should be true. So the people trust the
Mírásis to this day.
Some of the legends regarding the origin of the Mírási are curious
inventions, intended probably to explain their low place in the social
scale. Thus, according to one story, when Abraham was to be burnt,
answered. "I am not suro whether I shall not be killed and I wanted my last remembranco
of you to be that of my body touching yours." Whoreupon the Prophet wished him woll,
Thoro are similar accounts in other old biographies of the Prophet.



Mírási groups.
109
his body was placed on one end of a wooden lever over a fierce fire,
but the people were unable to lower it as God sent angels to counteract
their efforts. Satan then appeared and said that Abraham could only
be lowered into the fire while a brother and sister consummated their
union publicly! Ad and his sister Jogát were tempted into this
incestuous union and the angels fled at the sight. The lever was
then lowered into the flames. Another story makes the Mírásis the
offspring of a darvesh's sin. Two boys were born in human shape and,
abandoned by the darvesh, were brought up by a king in princely
guise but Satan found time by night to teach them to sing, dance and
play musical instruments, to the king turned them away and they be.
gat the Mírási caste.
Mírási organisation."
An attempt will now be made to give some idea of the intricacies
of the Mírási organisation, or disorganisation as it might be called.
It is even more elusive and fluid than that of the Bháțs who overlap
the Mírásis and cannot be altogether disentangled from them. ..
Rai Mírási.-The Rai Mírási-compare the Rai Bhat-is a man of
education and teaches boys Hindi accounts like a pádha. He is also
& poet and composes kabits. The Rais aro Mírásis of the Játs in Jind,
or perhaps Játs' Mírásis rank as Rais.
In Hosbiárpur the Rais claim to have been Hindu Bháts who were
converted to Islám but continued to compose and recite kabits after
conversion. Being Brabmans by descent and in former times having
been attached to influential clans and ruling chiefs they stand high in
the Mírási social scale and do not intermarry outside their own group.
But in this District they do not teach. In Lahore, however, they
teach the three R's, commit to memory the pedigrees of their patrons
and get lágs (dues) at wedding, and on the birth of a son. În some
places they are cultivators and become patwâris or even field gánúngos.
But all Mírásis are styled Rai'on account of their slow and majestic
manner of speech.'*
Mir Mírásis are panegyrists, but the term Mír is applied to any
Mírási out of courtesy. It is also said that the Mír Mírási is so called
because he is a mírási of the wealthy (amír).
But in Ludhiána a mér mirási is defined to be one who taking a
jhanda (a pole with a pennon) in hand recites verses in honour of their
priest (sic) Lakhdáta or Sakhí Sultan of Baghdad. They are heard
in the streets of towns and villages saying in à loud voice, Agardúdú
da mámá lunjda ; khair is khazáne di mangda.
In Lahore they are said to be educated men, who compose panegyrics.
They recite eulogies in Persian and even Arabic and are known as
madáh khwan.
The Dhadhi is one who plays the dhadh and sings the deeds of heroes
dead and gone. Little else about him is known with certainty. He
* But in Gurgaon the Rai is said to have nothing to do with the Mírási as the latter is
beneath him. The Rai is a Musalman and a composer of songs and kabits; Gang, a Rai,
is said to have been attached to Akbar's court.



110
Mirási groups.
is endogamous, at least in Ludhiana and Jind. In Mandi he is alleged
to be of the Tanúr caste and the Jind got. In that State he recites the
deeds of heroes at the Rájá's table, but his women-folk do not sing
and dance before the ladies of their patrons, like other Mírási women.
Yet he enly gets half as much as other Mírásis and intermarries with
them. But the chief Dhadhi receives the title of Rána from the
State, gets extra dues and acts as its herald. Dhádhis will not inter-
marry with Karháli Mírásis as they are of lower rank, but seek
alliances with the Rájputs? Mírásis of adjacent States.
In Loháru the only Mírásis are the Dhadhi. In that State they
are Mírásis of the Sheorán Játs and are styled dáda or grandfather
by their patrons, even when children. They are said to have accom-
panied the Sheorán from Sambhar. They get lágs on ceremonial
occasions but also cultivate and work as labourers at harvest time for
a share of the grain. The Játs fear their curses, as if a man
does not give a Mírási something at a wedding the latter makes
an image of him out of rags, fastens it to the top of a pole and walks
through the village with it. Sometimes he even strikes this effigy,
and so disgraces his patron who is compelled to come to terms with
him by a payment of money. These Dhádís intermarry with the
Dúth, Palna and Babar Mírásis. The Dúth live in Bíkáner and are
Mírásis of the Púnia Játs. The Palpa and Babar live in the Shai.
kháwatí ilaqa of Jaipur, where they are Mírásis of the Játs and
Rájputs. The Dhádís agajn have Mírásis of their own, called Bhatia,
who only take dues from Dbádhis. The chaudhris of the Dháchis live
in Sidhanwá and Gothara villages where panchayats are held. They
worship all the prophets like Muhammadans but have special faith
in the Imáms Hasan and Husain. At a wedding they first give halwá
by way of niáz in honour of Hasan, Husain and Fátime. They also
revere Khwaja Muín-ud-Din Chishti of Ajmer and Khwaja Hajab
Shakarbár when the kangna is tied at a wedding. Karewa obtains
among them. They follow the Muhammadan law of inberitance.
Their women sing with other females in the houses of their patrons.
They eat and drink with the Mírásis of all castes and gots, but they
only smoke together. They avoid three gots in marriage and observe all
the ceremonies performed by their patrons, the Sheorán. If a Sheorán
goes to celebrate a marriage in any other village he gives a rupee to
each girl of his caste in his own village, and he must also give a rupee to
each Dhádhi girl in the village, as Játs treat their own girls and those
of the Dhádhi on terms of equality.
The Kaláwant are Mírásis possessed of skill (kala). They sing and
play on the tambourine, and are described as Mírásis of the Rájputs.
They especially affect the dhurpat mode in music; and the famous
Tán Sen, whose tomb is still to be seen at Gwalior, was a member of
this group. At his tomb is a tamarind tree the leaves of which will
cure a singer's sore throat though they are bitter and injurious to any
one else who is so afficted. The Kaláwands, as they are also called,
are Muhammadans.
The Karhála or Khariala Mírásis raok below the real Mírásis becauge
their ancestors married women of other castes. Other Mirásis do not



Mírási groups.
111
marry with them. They are story-tellers and musicians, playing the
tabla and sárangi. They practise karewa, and are Mírásis of castes
which also practise it. A few Karbalas are Imáns in mosques, but
most of them live by begging from door to door. Indeed the Gurdás-
pur account classes them with the Pakheji, who play the tambourine
for dancing girls, Dúm, and Dhadhi as a group of the Bháņd.
Folk-etymology in Rohtak actually derives Karhála from gelar, a
pichhlag or step-son, as this group sprang from a boy whose mother
married a Mírásı after his birth. In some parts of the Punjab the
Karhála are said to take alms from goldsmiths, and occasionally to live
by making moulds for manufacturing ornaments. This art they do not
teach their daughters, lest they should teach it to their husbands'
families. In Gurgaon the Karhála appear to be called Karhái or
Jahangirta. They play and compose, and sing ballads of chivalry,
The Kumáchis are, according to one account, the highest of the
Mírásis as they serve Brahmans. But according to another account
they were themselves Bári Brahmans. They say that when the
Muhammadan rulers began to convert those Brahmans by force to
Islám one of their ancestors offered himself as a convert on condition
that he and his descendants be held in respect by all the Bári
Brahmans. The result is that to this day all Bári Brahmans have to
incur heavy expense at weddings in payment of lágs (dues) to the
descendants of their Mubammadanised ancestor. When the barát
reaches the bride's village, they are obliged to feed all the Kumáchi
Dúms, their ponies, etc., that happen to come there, be their number
large or small. When the batehri (átá, dâl, ghi, etc.) comes from
the bride's parents each Kumáchi, whether a child or an adult,
must be given one ser of atá and 2 pice in cash. If a woman be
pregnant, the share of the unborn child is also given her. If the
provisions sent by the bride's parents be insufficient, the bridegroom's
father must pay for the extra átá, etc., required from his own pocket.
In addition the bridegroom and the bride's father jointly contribute
10 pice for every Kumáchi who is present. Each Kumáchi also gets a
rupee out of the dowry, so that the Bari Brahmans are heavily mulcted
at weddings by the Kumáchí Dúms.
Mír Mangs are Mírásis of the Mírásis, keeping their pedigrees and
taking alms from them alone. In Gurdaspur they appear to be called
Mir Malang. In Gurgaon however the Mírásis' Mírási is said to be the
Dúm and the Mírási of the Bhangi is called a Kannas Mírási.*
Nagarchis are Mírásis who play the naqára or big drum at weddings
and at the tombs of Muhammadan saints.
MUTRIB, NAQQÁL and QawwÁL: 99.v..
Rabábis are Mírásis, who are so called because they play the
rabáb. They trace their descent from Bhai Mardána, a Mírási who used
to play the rabáb before Gurú Nának. They are Sikhs and believe in
him and recite shabads from the Granth. They beg alins from Sikhs
only while other Mírásis take alms from all castes. They do not
intermarry with other Mírásis. As they are Sikhs they wear the hair
* Cf. p. 106, supra.



112
Mírási clientship.
long and dress like the Sikhs among whom they 'live. They play the
rabáb before a Sikh's bier when it is being carried out to the burning
ground, but they bury their own dead. In Hissár the Mírásis of
Bikaner are said to be called Rabábi in contradistinction to those of
Jaipur who are called Dholi. In Rohtak. it is claimed that the
Rabábis. were Muhammadans descended from Mír. They used to play
the rabáb, also called daf or dáira, the only instrument permitted to
Muhammadans, and then only on condition that it is played without the
jháng. It is used at the [d, at weddings, and when a person returns
safely from a journey. Mardán Khán, a descendant of Mír, who used to
play this instrument before the Gurú, became a Sikh with the title of
Bhái Mardána.
Other minor groups, which it is impossible to define though they are
in the main clearly occupational are: The Bhagtia is a mimic who is
said to be known in Lucknow as a Kashmiri. The Bhanwáyia perform
various feats of juggling on a brass plate. They also sing and dance.
The Cháran is the foot-man, messenger or envoy of Rajputána. The
Dafzan are described as women of the Dhádbi class, who sing in a
circle. The Dafáli on the other hand play on the dafri or small drum
and sing songs in praise of holy men. The Gopa play the tambourine
in contradistinction to the Safurda or Sipardai and rank above them.
The Halvi is said to be one of the two groups of the caste in Hissár,
Bhát being the other. The Hurkia play the hurak, a small organ,
wbile their women, in gay apparel, clap hands. The Jangaria are men-
tioned but not described. They would appear to be bellmen. The
Kalál are Mírásis of the Kurabárs, and take alms from no other caste.
Sometiines they themselves do potters' work, but they usually provide
the music at a Kumhár's wedding * The Khamru play the tabla, a
kind of drurn or rather tambourine with a single skin. The Kaujri is
also described as a Mírási group thongh it is identified with the Kanchan.
The Kar Kabits are said to be singers of war-songs, but the term is
said to be a modern one. The Kateroria sing songs in praise of Krishna
and are said to wear the sacred thread. The Kathak are Hindus who
teach singing and dancing to prostitutes. The Shrotas, an obscure
class of Mírásis, appear to be also called Sota Hathái, who are Mírásis
of the Jáțs. The Sezda Toli are said to come from Malwa and Guzerat.
They play upon 13 bells with one stroke and also use large drums.
The Sipardai, or Safurda are a wide-spread group. They play the tabla
and sarangi, in contradistinction to the Gopa. They tou teach dancing
girls. They rank high, but are classed below the singers.. Like the
Kaláwant they are Muhammadans. The Tatua sing and dance, playing
on the pakhawaj and rabáb. As a genealogist the Mírási is styled
Nasab-khwan.
..: Mírási clientship...
Quite apart from their divisions into occupaticnal groups and their
varying status as a client caste, the Mírásis are further cross-divided
into natural gots or sections. A very large number of these are
attached to specified castes or tribes. For example, iu Rohtak the
Poslas are subdivided into four sections, Ghorián, Khariá, Malhar and
Gurbal, and these, with the Birú, Dedan and Sáik are mírásis of the
*Kalál has thus become a contemptuous tcrm for a Kumbár and he would rather be abused
than so addrossod.
.



.:
Mírási gots.
113
Sayyids.* The Kulet are mírásis to the Mughals. The Málet, Quraishi
and Sohal are mirásis to the Shaikhs, but they are also described as
divided into a number of gots thus :-
Baral, Ghori, Kak and Pahli-attached to the Afgháns.
Dáir and Tanor-attached to Rájputs.
Kallál, Lalha, Monga and Sanpt-attached to Jáțs.
Changar-attached to Brahmans.
Barwái-attached to Mahájans.
Shohal-attached to Khatris.
Latkanian--attached to Mális.
Anchhar, Babar, Dhadhsi, Daut, Halwa, Khirwar, Momia and
Pohla-unattached.
:: Origins of Mirási gots.
The origins of several of the Mírási sections are of interest. The
Mokhar say they are descended from their eponym, a brother of
Khokhar. The sons of the latter are Rájputs, while the Mokhar took
to begging from the Gbumman Játs. All the mirásis of the Ghuman
are Mokhar, but all the Mokhar are not Mírásis. Like other gots of
Mírásis they are found in other castes though in which castes does not
appear.
The Goria got claims the same origin as its patrons, the Chíma
Rajputs, whose Mihr Mang are of the Jand got. One Rájá Gang or
Ghang had 12 sons, they say, and one of them was Ghoria, some of
whose descendants are Telis, and others Mírásis, while some are
cultivators, and others horse-breakers who dislike being called Mírásis.
But in Gujrat the Goria are said to be descended from Kiú or Kise
Mirs who was a cripple and was employed by his brethren to keep
alight the lamp on their father's grave (gor)..
The Jand got is also called Gaile, its members being Mírásis of the
Gil got of the Játs. They are also Mihr Mang of the Chíma Rajputs.
The Gils worship the jand and the ancestor of these Mírásis also
meditated for a long period under this tree, so they are obviously
named from it. The Gils offer a he-goat, and a rupee to a Mírási at
weddings and get him to mark a tilak on their foreheads with
blood from the animal's ear. The Tindú are Mírásis of the Bhullar
Játs and so they are also called Bholra. The Siddú are Mírásis
of The Man Játs and are therefore also kuown as Mánke. The Panrot
of Panirot gut owes its name to its clients, the Bawrot Rájputs. The
The Joolamp on their fand was como descendea being callesome are
mit. This period and the ano
* In Gurgaon also the Posla are described as the Mírásis of the Sayyids. But the Kalet
are said to be Mírásis of the Gujars, the Jhands of the Ahírs, the Momia of the Rájputs,
the Sawadat of the Jats, and the Khandára of the Sángis.
in Lahore various gots of the Mírasis are said to be attached to various Ját and other
tribes, thus-
Posla, to the Goraya and Malhi Játs, as well as to the Sayyids. They are also
Mihr Mang to the Sahi Játs.
Chombar, to the l'araich on the right bank of the Chenab,
Kalet, 10 the Bhattis.
Panju, to the Sían Játs.
As to the Siddu. Jand and Goria see the text, infra. We find Mán, Bhullar and Ahir
given as Mírási gots,
+ This appears to be the 'snako tribe' alluded to below.



114
Mírási caste government.
Khandáras offer the bridegroom a khanda or dagger at his wedding,
whence their name.
Titles and caste organisation.
The Mírásis have a system of caste government, organised or at
any rate recognised by ruling chiefs. Thus in Jind the bead of the
Mírási panchayat is stylod Ráná. He is one of the descendants of
Mír Bakhshan, of Uchána in Jind tahsil. Subordinate to him are the
Raos, generally four in number, and under them are thọ kotwáls or
messengers. Mír Bakhsháp was a wealthy Mírási who obtained his
title by giving 14 mels at which he feasted those assembled. His
descendants still enjoy the title and act as presidents at panchayats,
receiving a rupee as their fee. , The title of Rao may be earned by
giving one or two mels. The kotwáls are appointed by the Ráná and
act as managers at a mel as well as messengers.
The panchayat decides disputes, within the brotherhood, as to re-
lationship and birt. It can excommunicate an offender or fine him the
cost of holding the pancháyat. He is brought up by the kotwal before
the Ráná who decides the case with the advice of the Raos and other
members of the panchayat. .
In the south-east Punjab the Mírásis have chauntras, the chief of
which is the sháh-chauntra at Khera near Delhi. Nextin authority is that
of. Uchána in Jind, and others are Kálánaur, Rohtak, Mahim, Gohána,
etc. A dispute is first decided by the chauntra to which the village is
attached, but it may then be carried to Uchána and finally to Khera.
Panchayats are said in Rohtak to be formed by Raos only, a Rao be-
ing a kartúti, or one who spends lavishly on weddings, etc. The pre-
sident of the panchayat at Khera appears to be styled Badshah and
receives a larger offering (nazr) at a meeting of the panchayat and on
festive occasions.
In Gurgaon the Mírási panchayat is composed of chaudhris-from
21 villages each'village being called a kháp. The headchaudhri is
called Badshah. He has wazírs who live in different villages.
The Mírásis as clients.
The relations of the Mírásis to their patrons are described in the
following kabit or verse :-
Gunián ke ságar hain, zát ke ujágar hain, bikhári bádsháhon ke;
Parbhon ke Mírási, Singhon ke Rabábi, Qawwál Pirzádon ke ;
Sabhi hamen jánat hain, Dúm mâljádon kę.
“We are the ocean of knowledge (gún), enlighteners of castes, beg-
gars of kings, Mírásis (hereditary bards) of our patrons, Rabábis of the
Sikhs, and Qawwál (story tellers) of the Pírzadás (Shaikhs). All mon
know us, we are the Dúms of the wealthy."
The relation between the client Mírási and his patron is very close.
For example, if the patron tribe eschews widow remarriage, the
Mírásis attached to it will also avoid it. If the patrons avoid four
gots in marriage, the dependent Mírásis will also do 80 generally, but
not always. If two tribes of Rajputs or Játs do not intermarry their



Mirási cults.
115
the boon of 2 meditation.co, O Mother er, and A
world. The all comporte ar leabhebt
? Om God sivo
a brilliant light powerfalecemove all hopi
Mírásis also will not intermarry. In Kapurthala it is said, on the
other hand, that Mírásis of the Rájputs only intermarry with those of
Rajputs : Gujars' Mírásis with those of Gujars; Aráíns' with those of
Aráíns, and so on. The Chuhțas also, at least in Amritsar, have
Mírásis of their own who are endogamous.
Cults.
Although the Mírásis are Muhammadans they frequently affect the
Devi, especially Durga Bhawáni, and before beginning a song or hymn
they sing her bhet as follows:
A Durgá Bhiwani, hamári ang sang hamári mushkil ásán hoe. “O
Durga Bhiwani, come into our company, so that our difficulties may be
removed."
But only a few still continue her worship and in Ludhiána it has
ceased altogether for half a century. In Amritsar, however, Mírásis
take offerings made to the goddess as well as those to Sakhi Sarwar.
In Mandi the Mírásis, though Muhammadans observing the rules of
Islám, also believe in Devi Bhawáni, and often sing the following bymn
in praise of Devi Bákbáni, the goddess of eloquence :-
“O Mother Bákbáni, give us wealth and power, and also the coveted
nine virtues, and increase our race. O Mother Bákbáni, give us know.
ledge and (the gift of) meditation on God, give us all happiness and
grant us the boon of fearlessness. O Mother reinove all our afflictions
and give us all comfort. Thou art powerful to fulfil the desires of the
world. Thou art a brilliant light and all brightness, O Ambka Rám.”
Devat Sidh is also affected in Hoshiarpur.
The Muhammadan saints affected by the Mírásis are numerous.
Sakhi Sarwar is often invoked. He is believed to avert pain and misery
and pilgrimages are made to Nigáha.
In Gurdaspar Pír Murtaza is an especial saint of the Mírásis, and the
shrine of Hidayat Ali Shah, one of the Pírs, is reverenced at Masánia
in Batála tahsil. Sháh Massá Wali, whose shrine somewhere in Sialkot
District is a place of pilgrimage, was himself a Mírási. In Gurgaon
Sháb Baháwal Haqg is the Pír of the Mírásis, but Amir Khusrau of
Delhi and Hazrat Dáúd are also regarded as Pírs.
In Siálkot the Mírási have no special Pírs. They worship the
Paranoi-pír. Ghaus Azam Jiláni and rovere Lákhándádáta, who gave lakhs
of rupees to beggars. He is considered a great saint by Mírásis and
by the Shaikhs who beat the drum. They also call him Lukhi Khán
Díwán. He performed many miracles, and got from heaven a horse to
ride. Whenever a Mírási sees his jajmán, he says Allâh sach ; Nabi bar
haqq; didár Alláh dá ; shafaat hazrat di. “God is true; the prophet
is right; God is seen; the intercession of the propbet is obtained." It
is said by Mírásis that the first part of this utterance was made by
Hazrat Qásá from whom they claim descent. Qásá uttered these words
when he saw the mohr-i-nabuvvat or 'seal of prophecy' on the Prre
phet's back. Qásá know that the last Prophet would have a seal on
his back.



116
Mírási snake worship.
The Mírásis receive wels or dues at births, marriages and deaths, In
villages at the birth of a son the whole of a Mírási's household goes to
their jajmiin or client's house in a body and near the door-way the
head of the Mirási family inakes a goli thus :-
A space, one foot and a half square, is washed with water and cow.
dung. While it is still wet,
dry áta (four) is poured
over it in such a way that
the marginal figure is pro-
duced. A small earthen
lamp is then lit and placed
on one of the outer
lines of the figure. A
ball of wet earth, with
the green stalks of some
grain-producing plant stuck
in it is placed near the
lamp, to signify that the
new born son is the light
of the house and that the
tree of the family, i. e., the
wife, has borne fruit. The
Mírási then ascends to the
roof and sits with his face to the West or North (both considered holy
by Muhammadans, the one as facing the Ka'abá, the other as the direc-
tion of Baghdad where the great Par Dastgír lies buried). The brother-
hood then give the Mírási their wels of cash, clothes and grain according
to their means. The child's parents must also pay the Mírási his dues
on their own account. Sometimes he will demand a cow or buffalo as his
wel and it must be given, however reluctant they may be to give'it.
Like the Kahárs and Bhujwas the Mírásis are said to be able to
make guddas or effigies of cloth or wax into which pins are stuck to
torture the person represented. The qudda used also in former times
to be stuck on a pole and paraded in the streets to annoy anyone who
had not paid them adequate dues.*
The 'gpake tribe' of the Mírási is said to be peculiarly devoted to
snake worship. At the end of Sáwan Mírásans of this tribe make a
enake of dough, paint it black and red, and put it on a winnowing
basket with its head slightly raised, like a cobra's. This basket is
Carried round the village and then it is presented with the snake at
any bouse with an invocation to Gugga. A cake and butter should
be offered by the house-holder and something is always given, but in
houses where there is a bride or whence a bride has been sent, or where-
in a son has been born Re. 1-4 or some cloth are usually given. A
piece of cloth ensures a lovely bride. The snake is then buried and a
small grave built over it. Here during the 9 days of Bhadon women
worship. The night before a basin of curds is set as if for making
butter, but in the morning instead of being churned, it is taken to the
snake's grave, the woman kneeling and touching the earth with her
*P. N. Q., I, S 945.



The Mirásis in the South-West.
117
forehead. The curds are then taken home and divided amongst the
children, no butter being made or eaten on that day. A small portion
is also offered at the grave. In places where snakes abouod, the wor-
ship is done in the jungles where they are known to be and not at the
snake's grave.*
The Mírásis in the South-West Punjab require separate description,
The caste' is there organised on different lines. Thus in Multán the
highest groups are said to be the Dorán and Kapotra, who intermarry.
These are the Mírásis of the Joiyas, but they also receive due from the
Sayyids. They claim descent from the Prophet.
Next come the Ráná, formerly Brahmans, but now Muhammadans.
They are found in Rájputána and are Mírásis to the Rájputs and Say-
yids. They are said to be endogamous.
After them come the Sewak, or Qawwál, who are Subs by sect and
play the guitar; but they also act as Mirásis to the Quraishis. They
rank and intermarry with the Kanotra and Dorán. They too claim to
be descendants of the Prophet, yet they intermarry with the low-caste
Cháran. .
The Kalanot are unattached Mírásis who beg alms from the general
public. They clain descent from Gurú Nának and are said to be
numerous in Delhi and in Pațiála and Kapurthala. But in the same
account it is said that they are descendants of Nának Bakhsha, a do-
scendant of Tán Sen, before whose time they were Hindus. They are
said to intermarry with the Kanotra.
The Jathi were formerly Chuhrás but were converted to Islám by
Baháwal Haqq. They are Mírásís of the Sial, and are endogamous.
The Khariála (? Karhála) are Mírásis of the Kumhárs and receive
dues from them and the Paolis. They are said to be endogamous,
They, like the Posla, claim descent from Abdul Malik.
The Lachh, described as an offshoot of the same stock as the Dúm
and Dadi, are said to be descended from Khwaja Kalsa. All these
three groups live by begging, reciting pedigrees and composing kabits.
They appear to intermarry, but constitute an endogainous group.
The Langá are Mírásis of the Dáúdpotras.t They are described as
endogamous.
The Lori, obviously the Luri of Balochistan, are said to be Mírasis
of the Baloch and to be themselves a remnant of that race, being
descendants of Amír Hamza. They are said to be endogamous.
The Poglas live by begging and regard the Sayyids as their antagonists
because tbey are said to have cut off the hand of the Imam Husain at
Karbalá, an accusation entirely devoid of historical proof. They
intermarry but sive daughters to the Kanotre and Doráni, Like the
Khariála they claim descept from Abdul Malik. They are said to take
brides from every other group, but not to give daughters to any other
(except, presumably, the two mentioned above).
ging and regarde hand of the Imámoot.
They
* P. N. Q., II, § 555.
+ But in Dera Gházi the Langá or Dúm is the Mírási of the Baloch.



118
Mírásis in the South-West.
The Rai Mírási are Hindu Bháts, but they receive dues from Sayyids
and Joiyas as well as from Hindus.
The Sardoi are Mírásis of the Patháns and also claim Pathan
descent. But the same account says they are descendants of the
Prophet. They are described as endogamous.
The Wilayati claim Shaikh origin and take alnas from the Parhár.*
They are said to be endogamous.
Lowest of all are the Cháran, who are Mírásis of the Sumrá. But
they claim descent from the Prophet and intermarry with the Qawwal.
In Dera Gházi Khán the Mírásis are divided into six groups, or
rather into five, thus :-
1. Mírásis and 2. Qawwáls, who intermarry, while the following
groups do not :-
3. Langá or Dúm,t 4. Bhát, I 5. Dhadhis, $ 6. NAT, more akin to the
Mochi than to the Mírásis.
The Mírási gots are 7 in pumber :-
1. Piplini.
5. Mongha, attached to the Daba Játs.
2. Sajáni.
6. Mír Mírási.
3. Chocháni.
7. Posla.ll
4. Sidhar, attached to the Parhár
Játs.
The first four gots are considered equal. They have a headman
styled mihtar, who settles disputes and is given a lungi or turban at
a Mírási wedding. The Mongha claim to be really Mugbals. Like
the Sidbar they paver wear black cloth or green bangles, thus follow-
ing the example of the patron clans. They have a tradition that an
angel once brought 'sometbing for the Prophet, but the muazzin
Hazrat Balál, in the Prophet's absence, received in his mouth as he
had a vessel in one hand and a meat in the other. Inadvertently he
swallowed the angel's gift, and the Prophet then promised him that if
his descendants never ate the leavings of others their words, whether
good or bad, should be efficacious and that people should voluntarily
summon them on festive occasions. Balál is said to have left two sons
Ara and Kása, ása meaning prosperity. From Asa both sections claim
descent.
The Mírási of Dera Gházi are said to be all Shias, and their name is
popularly derived from marsia, a dirge, because they sing at funerals.
They and their women-folk do all kinds of work at a death, receiving
cash and grain, and a meal at the qul-khwani. But they also assist
at weddings and festivals, playing the naqára and dhol (drums) and
the sharná or pipe, and receiving dues in cash and kind. Mírásis are
attached to certain families, and are paid by each with a chung or
* In Dera Gházi the Sidhar got of the Mírásis is said to be client to the Paſhár Játs.
t See supra, p. 117.
† The Bháts in Dera Gházi are fow. They live on the alms of the well-to·do, and if not
fee'd adequately compose disparaging verses about them, but if satisfied they sing intermin.
able eulogies of their patrons.
$ The Dhádhis are rather more numerous. They are wandering minstrels who'arouse
wealthy people before sunrise, like the Jágás, with panegyrics.
|| The Mir Mírási in Jámpur will not eat or drink with the Posla, saying that the lattor's
ancostor broke the Prophot's waist-string.



Mirdadi-Mirke
119
handful of grain, called jhok, at harvest. In return they convey
news of deaths and the dates fixed for weddings. Their women also
play and sing before the women-folk of their patrons' families at
weddings. The Qawwáls are more especially employed as singers at
shrines at the urs or other occasions, acting as Mírúsis to the saint
of the shrine and being paid by him or his followers. Ascetics also
give them garments in alms. Tán Husain is regarded as their Pír
and teacher in the art of singing.
· The Mírásis in Mianwali are divided into the following groups which
are described as endogamous :-
1. Pirain or Piráhin.
5. Dhadhi, also called Rawa or Shai.
2. Mirasi, i, q. Dúm.*
kháng.
3. Kalá want.
6. Bhand.
4. Sarodi.
These groups are said to rank in the above order. The Piráhin is
a Mírási who affects Pír Lalanwala or Sakhi Sarwar and begs in their
name. Vows are made to the Pírs for male issue and gifts made to
the Piráhin accordingly. He carries a drum to which are fastened
wisps of cotton offered by women of all creeds. The Piráhin would
appear to be the Bharai of the rest of the Punjab. The Mírási or
Dúm is a drummer too, but he waits upon guests at weddings and
funerals, and is also employed as a confidential messenger. His
earnings vary with his patrons' prosperity. The Kalá want is a
musician, more skilled than the Mirási; and the Sarodi resembles him
but he plays on the rabáb or sarod and performs also as a tumbler
The Dhadhi is a genealogist or story-teller and is not attached to any
particular family or tribe. The Bhánąt is a Naqqal or mimic.
The Mirási gots are :-
1. Bohare.
6. Lobani Khel.
2. Bhatti.
7. Panju Khel.
8. Bothu Khel.
8, Sultáni Khel.
4. Barzid Khel.
9. Halím Khel.
ö. Pandi Khel.
10. Lále Khal.
All of whom acknowledge a common ancestor. In Leia tahsil the
following gots are returned :-
1. Dijwá, clients of the Sumrá, Kalasra, Dolu, Jhakbar and
Lohánch tribes.
2. Bibi, clients of the Chándia and Kuláchi.
8. Panwár, clients of the Langáh, Panwar and Wándáh. I
Mirdání, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
MIRDÁ), an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
MIBDANGI, -ía, a player on the mirdang.
MIRKB, a Kharra! clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
* But in Leia the Dúm is said to be distinct from the Mírási, the latter having jajmáns
whoso ancestors they eulogise, and from whom they receive dues (lág); while the Dúm is
unattached apparently to any tribe.
+ The Bhánd return two gots in Miánwali, vis., the Pira Khel and Choghatta.
'+ Other groups mentioned as not resident in Leia are the Khurshídia, Malikzáda, Shakar
Wandia and Talwandia, but as to these no information is available.



120
MirokMirráne.
MIROK, a Hindu Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MIRRÁNI, MIRRHÁNI, a tribe of Baloch, once numerous and powerful, but
now almost extinct. Captain Hector Mackenzie said that rather more
than three centuries ago the Deraját was under the government of
some Baloch families. To the north, including Dera Ismail Khán, the
Hot family, and to the south, with head-quarters at Dera Gházi Khán,
the Mirrháni branch of the tribe ruled large sections of the country.
Some 300 years ago, Gházi Khán Mirrháni sent four of his sons across
the Indus to colonize the Sindh Ságar Doáb. Beginning from the
South, Udo Khán founded Kot Udo, Sultán Khán, Kot Saltán, Kamal
Khán. Leia, and Muhammad Khán, Now shera. They were also accom-
panied by a miscellaneous body of emigrants to till the ground.
Kamal Khan was the most powerful of the four brothers, and assumed
a supremacy over the other three. His influence extended from Kot
Udo to Bhadkal, now a deserted village in the Jharkal property, some
25 miles north of Leia, thus including the Koraishi colony. Further
north the Jaskáni Baloch clan, who at this time were, he believed,
in subordination to the Hot Baloch, rulers of Dera Ismail Khan, held
possession of the country.
After some 30 or 40 years of Mirrháni rule, the Kamal Khán of the
day was killed and succeeded by one Núr Mabammad Sirai, who with
Ghulam Shih, a Kalhora Abbássi, came from Umrkog in Sindh. Núr
Muhammad enlarged the boundaries of the tract lately under Mirrháni
rule, as far as Mahmúdkot on the south. He met the Syáls on the
Jhelum to the east, and on the north he pushed the Jaskánis back, and
took possession of the country as far as Daryá Khán.
We next hear of Nawab Muhammad Gujar who ruled for some years,
and died in Sirhind, his son Barkhúrdár Khán succeeded him. The
Jaskánis, however, took the first opportunity of retrieving their posi-
tion, and armed with a sanad of the Court at Khorásán, Baloch Khán
Jaskáni, a resident of Bhakkar, came, and not only recovered the
territory formerly taken from the Jaskánis by Núr Muhammad Sirai,
but overran the whole of the country formerly held by the Mirrhánis,
and we hear no more of its chief Barkhúrdár Khán.
Henceforward the greater part of the Doáb from Kallúr to Mahmúd-
kot was held and treated, until our own time, in respect to its adminis-
tration, as one division of the Mughal empire, or the Sikh kingdom.
While under the Jaskánis, its boundaries were, on the north, Darya
Khán under the Hot Baloch rulers of the Deraját, and the 5 ilágas
(termed the Panjkotha) of Pipla, Kallúr, Harnauli, Jhandawala and
Kot Adu which were in the bands of the Balúch Patháns; on the east
the tracts held by the Tiwána and Syál families, while the south was
dependent on Multán, and on the west ran the river Indus.
The Jaskánis being now without rivals, forthwith began to quarrel
amongst themselves. Baloch Khán was killed by Gishkori Baloob,
and was succeeded by his son Fatteh Khan, who was in his turn mur-
dered by a Mandrini. Fattah Khán had a son Hayat Kháu, but he
was incarcerated, when quite a boy, in the fort of Mankera, and for a
few years Hassan Khán Lashkarani, Fattah Khán’s fair, held the
rains of power. Hayát Khán escaped from confinement and, killing



Mirsadá-Mishwáni.
121
Hassan Khan, took his father's place. But the day of adversity came
to him also, with its accustomed regularity. The Sargánis rebelled,
and led by Goli Khán, took the fort of Mancera, putting Hayát Khán
their chief to the sword, in Hijri 1204, A. D. 1787. They were, how-
ever, almost immediately afterwards defeated by Hayát Khán's brother,
Muhammad Khan, who thereupon assumed the government. He was
the last of the Jaskáni rulers. After a vory few years of power bo
was ousted by a descendant of Núr Muhammad Sirai, named Abdul
Nabi, who obtained a sanad from the Khorásán ruler of the day,
Taimúr Shah. Muhammad Khan then retired to a village in the
Sangar ilága, trans-Indus, now in Dara Gházi Khán, where his
grandson Imam Bakhsh Khan and others of the family still lead an
obscure life.
Gházi Khán was the title always assumed by the Mirráni Baloch
who ruled at Dera Gházi Rhán. Similarly Ismail Khan was a title
assumed by the Hot ruler at Dera Ismail Khan but it was alternately
varied by that of Ibrahim Khan, and in like manner when Kamál
Khán took possession of part of the Sindh Ságar Doáb he transmitted
that name to his successors as their title.
The influence of the Mirránis lasted long after their nominal rule had
ceased. With the Quraish of Kahror Lál Isá and the Gházi Khán's
four sons came a miscellaneous body of immigrants-Sayyid, Balocb,
Ját and other adventurers. Land was practically unlimited in extent,
a virgin soil, open to appropriation by the new-comers at will. To
them it was accordingly apportioned by their leaders, in large lots
within whose limits it was in the power, as it was also to the interest
of each grantee to do all that he could in the way of agricultural
improvement. This class bave always retained their lordship of the
manors. They have always maintained a tangible superiority, and
were therefore recognised as owners of landed rights superior to all
other proprietors.*
MÍRSADÁ, a caste of Muhammadans, Panjabi Dicty., p. 753.
MISGAR, see Thathera.
MISHWÁNI, a tribe of Patháns, who also return themselves as Sayyids, as
they are descended from a Sayyid father by a Kákar woman. They
are affiliated to the Kákars in Hazára, but a few of them crossed the
Indus with the Utmánzai, to whom they were attached as retainers, and
they now occupy the north-east and of the Gandgarh range, about
Srikot.
MI8HWANI, a Pathán tribe, allied to the Kákars being descended from a
Sayyid, Mishwáni, one of the four sons of Muhammad-i-Gísu-Daráz, or
: Muhammad of the long locks,' by a Kákar woman. She was a daugh-
ter or grand-daughter of Kákar and her husband was adopted by
Danai, Kákar's father. Other Sayyids however do not internarry with
* Among the miscellaneous dues levied from the landowners in this part of the Sindh
Ságar Doáb was one peculiar to that tract. This was the tik, imposed by Kamal Khan,
bocause the clasp (tik) of a lady friend's bracelet had been stolen. The theft was made the
pretext for the exaction, just as a birth, death or marriage in the ruling family was made
a pretext for imposing oxtra burdens on the tax payer in other parts of the country.



122
Misr-Mochar.
the Mishwáni. They are found in Hazára, a few of the claw having
crossed the Indus with the Utmánzai, to whom they were attached as
retainers, and thoy now occupy the eastern end of the Gandgarh range,
about Srikoţ. Said Sharíf of that place is their chief. They are
sturdy, industrious, well behaved and more honest and truthful than
most of the tribes in Hazára, and Abbott described them as one of the
bravest races in the world.'*
Misr, fem. -ÁŅí. A title borne by Brahmans, especially by two Brahman
families in Jhelum who held high positions in Sikh times.t
Mitea, a branch of the Chauba Brahmans, confined to the Bawal nızámatt
of Nábha. They have the same gotras as other Brahmans but are
divided, like the Gaurs, into 36 sásans, including-
1. Rajaur.
11. Ratha.
· 21. Sahana.
2. Pandi.
12. Saniar.
22. Rasanyu.
3. Sunghan.
13. Birkhman.'
23. Kaskiya.
4. Gadur.
'1%. Panware.
24.
Ganar.
5. Saunsatya.
15. Misser.
25. Vyas.
6. Sunian.
16. Kanjrey.
26. Jaintiya.
7. Koina.
17. Bharamde.
27. Mathriya.
8. Sarohne.
18. Phakre.
28. Jain Satye
9. Ajmo.
19. Mithia.
29. Pachurer.
10. Agnaya
20. Nasware.
They only avoid their own sásan in marriage. The Mithas are gener-
ally parohits of the Mahajans, Ahírs and Játs but they also take service.
The Chaurási Brahmans of Bawal nizámat also call themselves Gaurs,
but though they are allowed to drink or smoke from a Gaur's hands, no
Gaur will take water or a huqqa from them. Their origin is thus de-
scribed :-When Rája Jamnajai summoned the Gaurs, from Bengal, an
erudite rishi Katayan by name, accompanied them and was chosen, as
the most learned of the company, to take the rôle of Brahman on the
occasion of a yuga or sacrifice. To sustain this part the rishi had to
wear a mask of four faces, whence his descendants are called Chaurási,
or the four-faced (from Sanskr. risa, face). They subsequeotly dissent-
ed from the Gauss on the question of dakhshina (money given as alms),
but it is not known why they are inferior to them, though their
numerical inferiority may account for it. Another group of Brahmans
in Bawal is the Hariána, with whom the Gauss also decline to drink or
smoke. They are cultivators, a fact which may explain their inferi-
ority. They too are mainly found in Jaipur, Alwar and Bhartour.
Mithe, an Aráín clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
MITHI, a small tribe found in the Paharpur ilága of Dera Ismáíl Khán.
They only number some 300 men.
Mireó, a clan of Ját status which holds a small circle of villages north of
Mailsi in Multán. It claims Bhatti origin, its eponym having come
from Bikaner 200 years ago.
Mochání, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MOCHAR, MOCHNAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
We the four-facaors on the maple they are in another goodline to drinkeri-
ed from the faced (from San hence his desce this part the man on the
i inot known the questions of face). Theys are called ch had to
* Bazára Gazetteer, 1907, pp. 27.8.
# Jhelum Gazetteer, pp. 118.9.
There is also a sisan (Mandolia) of the Dube Gauf Brahmans in Bawal.



Mochi.
123
Mochi, fom. -AN. (1) a blacksmith in the valley below Chitral and in the
Gilgit and Indus valleys: see Chitrali; (2) in the rest of these
Provinces the word Mochi is properly the name of an occupation, and
signifies the worker in tanned leather as distinguished from the tanner.
The Mochi not only makes leather articles, but he alone grains leather
and gives it a surface colour or stain, as distinguished from a colour
dyed throughout. In the east of the Punjab the name is usually
applied only to the more skilled workmen of the towns. In the west,
however, it is simply used to designate a Musalmán Chamár; and the
Mochi there is what the Chamár is in the east and belongs to the same
caste, though his change of religion improves, though only slightly, his
social position. He does not ordinarily weave, though in Hoshiarpur*
the majority of the Mochís are said to be weavers, and he is not
admitted to religious or social communion by the other Musalmáns.
In the west of the Punjab, however, the Chamár or Mochi no longer
occupies that important position as an agricultural labourer that he
does in the east. In the west he is merely a tanner and leather-
worker, and his numbers are proportionally less than when a large part
of the field work is done by him. Moreover he no longer renderg
monial service; and it may be that his improved social position is
partly due to this fact. Mr. Christie, indeed, said that so soon as a
Chamár, whether Aindu or Musalmán, abandons menial offices and
confines himself to working in leather, he rises in the social scale and
assumes the more respectable name of Mochi. The Mochi is proverbi-
ally unpunctual in rendering service and there is a saying, “The
Mochi's to-morrow never comes."
Synonyms, strictly speaking, there are none. Kafshdo: means
boot-sewer and sarráj, shairáj, síráz or shiráz means saddler. In
Ludhiana the Muhammadan Mochi is styled Shaikh and deals in
cloth as well as weaves. Indeed the principal occupation of the caste
is weaving so that the Mocbi-Juláhas are spoken of as if they were
almost one and the same caste. But the Mochis intermarry disregard.
ing the got, just like ordinary Muhammadans, and are said not to
intermarry with the Juláhas or any other caste. The principal gots
in Ludhiána are the
Jakhrah.
Baro.
Jhalli.
Mahmán.
Biswán.
Kauldhár.
Ratanpál Bhatti.
Choháil.
Khilar.
Shihmár.
Jábaf.
Kilry and Bangar.
Sindhu.
In Báwal the Hindu Mochis claim to be of the Kachhwahi gut, 1. e.,
they assert a Rájpat origin, and despise the Chawárs and Kbatíks.
Another got is Chauhán. In Nábha the Hindu Mochís are said to
affect Devi, Bhairon and other Hindu gods. Hospitality must be shown
to any member of the community, who is on a journey, under penalty
of excommunication. The caste has a system of chaudhris like other
artizan castes.
Another Mochi off-shoot is the Bhangar, which lives by weaving, and
has ceased to intermarry with the Mochis. It appears to be confined to
Kapurthala.
* In Jullundur the Mochly aro said to make boots, while the saráj makos saddles, ote
But in Hoshiárpur the converse is reported to be the case.



124
Mochimung-Mohana.
Though most of them are Muhammadans, Hinda Mochís are found
in the south-east of the Punjab, where they make boxes, saddles, etc.,
of leather, but not shoes. Muhammadan Mochís have no such pro-
judice. They include the Shirazí sub-caste, who eat and smoke, but do
not intermarry, with other Mochis, and whose original occupation was
harness-making, though now-a-days, either group follows the other's
occupation. Still as the Shiraz observe the Muhammadan law, other
Muhammadans will eat, smoke and associate with them,
The Shirazi sections are :
Bahota.
Kain,
Ghaki,
Sadráha.
Mahil.
The Rain is named after the caste from which it sprang. The others
are said to be eponymous.
In Báwal the Muhammadan Mochis claim descent from Shaikh
Nathbír, a Hindu Rájput of Jaisalmír who embraced Islám, and at
whose shrine in Guzerát they perform jatah twice a year. Their
sections in Nábha are :
Balu.
Galhot.
Rattú.
Bangaſh.
Kuler.
Saprán.
Chandhar.
Mallan.
Sardheb.
Gái.
Nagah.
Summan.
In Kapurthala the (Muhammadan) Mochi sections are said to be :-
Banjrá Ját.
Jal.
Mahrás.
Bhatti Rajput.
Kainkar.
Motle.
Kalor Ját.
Salam,
Kanthi.
Sásan Ját.
Daryah.
Khang Ját.
Shabhmer? Sinh.
Dhaliwal.
Khokhar.
Soni Khatri,
Ganero.
Lagáh.
Súman Mochi.
Lkhí.
Tur.
Harar.
Before commencing work Muhammadan Mochis invoke Hazrats Salih
and Mír, whose tombs are said to still exist in Arabia, and overy six
months they distribute sweets to the poor in their pames. In Dera
Gházi Khán the Mochi is addressed as Jám which bas almost become
a professional title.
The Chamrang, or dyers of skins, have 14 sections.
(3) A tribe classed as Jág in 1881 (4,767 souls) and found in Dera Gházi
Khán.
MOCHIMONG. a synonym for Bádi or Bázigar in Khushab, in the Shahpur
District.
MOGHAL, see Mughal.
MORAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán and Montgomery. :
MOHÁNa, said to mean a fisherman in Sindhi and to be synonymous with
Miáni. The Mohánas are merely an occupational group of the Jhabels
and Malláhs, but see under MALLÁH. In Dera Ghazi Khan the Muhana
gets the title of Mir Bahár prefixed to his name.
MORANA, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Ját.
Chandhar.
Gil.



16th centur hio hilof the Dokkabul riv
Mohar-Mohmand.
125
Monar, (1) a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) jound in Montgomery :
(2) a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MOHMAND, MAHMAND.-A branch of the Ghoria Khel Patháns. They are
divided into the lower or Plain Mohmand and the upper or Bar
Mobmand. The former occupy the south-west corner of the Pesbáwar
District, south of the Bára river, and are divided into 5 main sections,
the Mayárzai, Músazai, Dawezai, Matanni and Sarganni. Their
headmen, in common with those of all the Ghoria Khel, are called arbáb,
a title meaning master and conferred by the Mughal emperors. They
are good and industrious cultivators, and peacefully disposed, except on
the Afrídi border.
The Bar Mohmand separated from the Ghoria Khel early in the
16th century, and crossing the Kábul at Dakka, made themselves
masters of the hill country to the north of that river as far up as
Lalpura and west of the Doába, driving its inhabitants into Káfiristán.
They then re-crossed the Kábul river and possessed themselves of
the country between its south bank and the west of the Afridi hills to
the north of the Khaibar pass.
: Organization.
The Mohmands proper are composed of four great divisions :-
1. Tarakzai, including the Iga Khel and Burhan Khel, who
are collectively called Pandiáli Mohmands.
II. Halímzai.
III. Khwaezai.
IV. Baezai.
There are besides the above certain affiliated clans :-
(1). Dawezai
... | Divided into kuchi or nomad
(2). Utmanzai ... .. ) and udredunkai or settled.
(3). Kukkozai.
The kuchi Dawezai are considered Akhundzádas and never robbed.
The status of the Dawezai is expressed by the story that they are
descended from Dawai, the second wife of Mohmand.
The Mohwand tribal constitution is more aristocratio than is the
case of the tribes of the Sufed Koh and Tíráb, and the power of the
Kháns is well developed.
The Kháns of the Tarakzai, Halímzai, Dawezai and Utmánzai belong
to tHe Morcha Kor of the Tarakzai. Malik Morcha settled at Lálpura,
where a few grass grown mounds near Srikn ziárat mark the site of the
ancestral home. Malik Morcha was blessed by Murzad Wali Baba
(see p. 127) for rescuing one of his maid-servants and the Khánship con.
ferred on him. His , seventh descendant had two wives, Jahána, &
Morcha Khel by birth, and araba, a Khawaezai. The sons of the
former, Jahánai Kor, however never held the Khánship, which devolved
on the Arabai Kor, which is the Kbán Khel, but a Náib Khel, here-
ditary deputies of the Kháns, sprang from the Jahánai. The rule of
succession is that one of the Arabai Kor appointed to the Khánship.
ancestral 27% for rent sevente Ababa, Khe Behanship
by Khel, het om



120
Mohmand history.
The proper Khans of the Baezai are the Kháns of Goshta* the actual
chieftainsbip lying with the choice and accord of the tribe. This
family has the custom of chứndávand, in some form, for the Khánship
was divided between the sons of two different wives, those of a third
wife receiving no share (at least in the Kháoship). A family of the Isa
Kbel claims the title of Khán, as being the sarishtavál of the Tarakzai.
History.
In 1586 A. D. the Mohmands and other tribes of the Ghoria Khel in
the neighbourhood of Pesháwar, having made Jalála the ROSHÁNIA their
leader, revolted against the Mughals and invested the fort of Bagram
(Pesbáwar) killing Sayyid Hamid the faujdár when he sallied forth
against them.
The Tarakzai clan and its chiefs played a considerable part in the
history of the frontier in the Abdáli period. Zain Khán, its chief, was
sipáh-sálár and a great noble at the court of Ahmad Shah. After the
conquest of Debli by that monarch he held the Súbahdárship of
Sirhind. His grandson Arsalan Khan was also chief, but he rebelled
Against Taimúr Shah and succeeded in gaining over the Afridis and
other Afghán tribes. With their aid he returned to Dhaka, which he
had abandoned, and closed the Khaibar to Taimur Sháh's forces,
levying toll on caravans on his own account. But he was induced
to go to the Durráni court upder a safe-conduct and was there
imprisoned and eventually tied to the fore-feet of an elephant and
crushed to death, in 1792.
The Mohmauus have always been distracted by internal feuds. The
Baezai under Dindár Khan were at feud with the Tarakzai under
Arsalán Khán, each having slain the other's father.
Non-Mohmand Muhammadans.
Besides the Mohmands, the sole owners of the soil, every village
contains some families of carpenters, blacksmiths, weavers, barbers,
potters ; and in the larger villages live Parachas, a class of Muhammadan
traders, who are probably descendants of converts from Hinduism. In
addition there is a flactuating population of agricultural labɔurers and
tenants of the soil belonging to miscellaneous races who cultivate on the
métayer gystem, paying from two-fifths to one-half of the produce to
the landowners.
The boatmen of Lálpura, etc., are & peculiar race, keeping much to
themselves and intermarrying only in their class. Their generic name
is Nilábi, and they have a tradition that they came originally from
Bágh Niláb on the Indus, below Attock..
Hindus in the Mohmand country.
The larger villages contain from 1 to 50 families of Alindas, who
gain their living as bankers, accountants to the Kháns, grain-dealers,
* Goshta or Gwashta has a little history of its own. There is a well-known Afghán
saying that there are valiant youths in Gwashta. Its territory is now chiefly owned by
the descendants of Shaikh Ahmad, the Hazrat-i-Sirhindi, Imám-i.Rabbani, having been
conferred upon them by Taimúr Sháh or his son Shah Zaman who was their disciple as a
recompense for the territory of Sirhind of which Ahmad Bbáb Abdili bad deprived thom
when he invaded India in 1756.



Mohmand shrines.
127
grocers, pawn-brokers, goldsmiths and cloth merchants. They are not
permitted to ride and have to wear a distinctive dress (trousers striped
vertically with red). Idolatry is sternly forbidden. The Hindus have
adopted many Afghán customs, e.g., the blood-feud is not uncommon.
Hindu women are sold in marriage, and widows always remarry.
Tenures.
The custom of vesh has entirely ceased. Each family possesses its
hereditary piece of land, which it can sell or mortgage at will and
sach cuntracts are scrupulously respected.
Position of women.
Some sections, especially the Burhan Khel and the Tarakzai, are
engaged in a traffic in women, who are kidnapped in Swát, Boner and
Bajoor and passed on by the Utman Khel to the Mohmands who in
turn sell them to the Adam Khel Afrídis and the Orakzai. The
mullahs oppose the universal custom of the barter and sale of women.
Dress and Arms.
Blue is the favourite colour for turbans and shirts, as among the
Yusafzais. Blue is never worn by Afrídis and Shinwaris. The long
Afghán knife, the usual weapon of the Afrídis, Shinwáris and Ghilzais,
is rarely used by the Yusafzais and Mohmands who prefer the sword.
Language.
The Mohmand Pashto differs as much from the broad speech of the
Afrídis as it does from the singing intonation of the Shinwáris, and
approaches closely to the dialects of Kábul, using fewer words of
clearly Punjabi origin.
Ziárats and shrines in the Mohmand country.
The chief ziárats and shrines of the Mohmands are :--The ziárat of
Murzadwali Bába at Danish Kul, well known in North-Eastern
Afghánistán. The saint.who is buried there lived about 260 or 280
years ago at Kam Lalpura (a small village .2 miles below Lálpura) ;
his body was moved to Dánish Kul by his descendants, who enjoy
great respect and gifts of many lands in Gandao, among the Safis, at
Lalpura and in Bajaur. As his name implies, he was recognized as a
Wali upon his birth, and the legend goes that his mother, when
pregnant, having gone one day to pick gurgurra berries, the boughs
gently bent down of themselves to be plucked, as she passed from tree
to tree, a tribute to the virtues of her child. Who his ancestors
were is unknown, but he is held in deep veneration, for ever since he
lived there, Kam Lalpura has possessed the privilege of sanctuary;
its limits extend from the yellow ravine that lies between Kam Lalpura
and Lálpura to the ziárat of Mazub Bába near Palosi. Murderers and
outlaws live secure in the protection of Murzadwali Baba; and in &
case which I saw myself, a man of Lálpura, who was literally the
avenger of blood, stopped in the pursuit of his enemy as soon as the
latter had crossed the boundary of Kam Lálpura. Pilgrims from long
distances visit the grave at Danish Kul and bring from the tomb
handfuls of earth or pebbles, considering them powerful charms and
remedies for 'all kinds of ailments.



128
Moman-Mon.
Next in degree is the ziárat of Mazub. Bába, by tribe & Kakkezai
from Hazarnao, and a murid or disciple of Murzadwali, by whose
reflected light be shines. His grave is situated about 3 miles below
Parchào, on the left bank of the Kábul river, and is a walled enclosure
covered with tags and votive offerings. The descendants of Mazub
Bábą hold the villages of Reina and Parchao as a gift from the
Mohmands. Both they and the descendants of Murzadwali collect
offerings from the tribes, generally two or three seers of grain from
every plough at harvest, and have partitioned off the clans among
themselves, a clan or part of a clan being allotted to each family of
Miáns for their support. Minor ziárats are innumerable ; wherever
fakirs or Miáns have died, or a deed of peculiar atrocity has invested
the victim with the sympathy of the people, & flag is erected and a
line of stones is ranged facing west, for the traveller to pray.
There is also the Srikn ziárat at Lálpura.
On the very summit of Ilazai and of Tartara are two of those curious
nameless ziárats believed to be the resting-places of brothers; other
brothers are said to lie buried on the Chingai hill near Abazai, at
Panjpír in Yusafzai, and on the Hasan Abdál hill. According to
another version these brothers are the children of Bába Wali at
Kandahár; doubtless in these isolated shrines on inaccessible hill-tops
we find relice of some former creed which has been adapted to the
popular ziárat worship of modern Muhammadaps.
There is no colony of Sayyids in the Mohmand country; but descend.
ants of the well-known Miáns of Papin in the Sufed Koh are settled
at Chaknewar and Smutse near Lálpura.
Balots Khan (of Lalpura), one of the Kháns, is believed to have
struck water out of a rock with his staff on the hill near Tora Tigga,
where an old well (Buddhist most likely) is known as Balots Khán's
kuhai.
The Karmu-pmasi sept of the Sangu Khel are hereditary guardians
of the shinkai, a brass kettle-drum said to be only beaten on grave
occasions. It is also an oracle, being consulted before a foray, when
it sounds of itself if the raid is to be successful.
MOMAŅ, •IŅ, a true believer, orthodox Muhammadan, à Muhammadan
weaver. Panjabi Dicty., p. 758.
MOMI, a Hindu Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery. See
next.
Monií, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. See foregoing.
Su
Mon.---All over Ladakh are to be found vestiges of old forts, which are
commonly attributed by the natives to the time of the 'Mon' ráj or
« government. This same word mon is, Sir James Lyall believed,
used by the Bhots or Tibetans as a general name for the Hindu races
in Kulu or elsewhere, and the Mon ráj' is generally understood to
have come from the south : but this is only matter of an obscure
tradition, picked up from one or two Tibetans, and if there is any



Monan--Mote.
129
foundation of truth in it, it dates back to remote antiquity.* The first
oocasion within historic times on which Ladakh became in any degree
politically dependent on India would appear to be in A.D. 1687-88,
when, in return for aid given against an invasion of the Sokpás or
Kalmach Tártárs, a small tribute began to be paid to the governor
of Kashmír as representative of the emperor of Delhi, but & similar
tribute seems to have been paid at the same time to the government of
Lhása.t I may mention here that there are traditions in Láhul which
show that this invasion of the Sok pás extended thereto. Soine curious
subterranean tombs, with rough masonry walls, which are occasionally
uncovered by the slip or the break of the ground, are sometimes
attributed by the Láhulis to these Tártárs.” (Lyall's Kángra S. R.,
$ 128).
Monan, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
MON-BA, -PA, 'the people that do not know,'I i.e. Hindus. But see Mon.
Moạp, a Ját clan (agricultural).found in Multán.
Mondas, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MoŅdí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Moní, an ascetic, lit. silent.-- Panjabi Dicty., p. 758.
MONNÁR (apparently obs.), a class of people who used to manufacture an
inferior kind of salt : i.e. Lúngar.- Panjábi Dicty., p. 759.
Moyta, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MOR; & Ját tribe or got which holds a village in tahsil Sangrúr, in Jind.
It reverences the peacock because the mother of its ancestor who was
born in & jangal died on giving birth to him and the child was
protected from a snake by a peacock. It is also said to be connected
with the Khichar got. It affects Mahadeva (Shivji) and in Karnál
refuses to burn the wood of the cotton plant.
MORAN, a Ját chan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MORARE, a Ját clan found in Ludhiana. At weddings it cuts the palah
tree instead of the jandi, and then observes the playing with twigs.
It worships Sultán Sakhi Sarwar. After the marriage a roț or large
loaf is cooked, and a piece given Grst to a Bharai. The rot is then
distributed among the brotherhood.
MOȚAR, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Mote, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
* There is a legend current among the cominon people of Kángļa which may have some
connection with this Tibetan tradition. It is to the effect that a Rájá from the south, named
Amán or Mán, led an army all through Northern India and the adjacent countries seeking
for a power which would oppose him in the field, and finding none, at length he reached
the lake in Tibet at the source of the Sutlej, now called "Mán Talai or Mån Sarowar," and
in pride and exasperation, threatened heaven with his sword, whereupon he and his whole
army were overwhelmed iu.a snow storm and perished. The name suggests`a possible con.
nection with the Munda of the central hills of India and the Mon Khmer: 880 J. R. A. 8.
1908, p. 1130.
† Moorcroft mentions that the Giálpo at the same time became a Muhammadan, his son
rocanted, but continued to pay the tribute to the Mughal emperor. Change of faith seems
to bave been easier in those days : the wife of the Giálpo, of Moorcroft's time, was by birth
a Muhammadan princess.
A doubtful tráns. : see Kangļa Gazetteer, II, 1883.4, p. 120.



180
Motha-Mughal.
MOTHA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
MOTTAH, # Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
MOTYE, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Mral, a man of the Ghulam. class in Peshawar.
Mrican, a fabulous race of men, said to have been employed by the movánis
to build the ancient buildings in cut-stone found in Kulla. See under
Máwi.
MUGAL, MOGHAL, fem.-ání: (1) The Mughals proper or Mongols, for the two
words are only different forms of the same name, probably either entered
the Punjab with Bábur, or were attracted thither under the dynasty of
his descendants. They are probably to be found in greatest number in
the neighbourhood of Delhi, the capital of that dynasty ; and Sir Denzil
Ibbetson believed that the great majority of those who returned them.
selves as Mughals in the Eastern Punjab really belong to that race.
They are also numerous in the Rawalpindi division and on the upper
frontier, along the route of the Mughal armies, and where they find
a more kindred people than in the great Punjab plains. But as will
be presently exưlained, the number of true Mughals in these parts is
certainly much smaller than would appear from our figures. The
Mughals of Gujrát are described by Mr. Monckton as “ an nnhappy race.
Puffed up with pride of birth, they account themselves above
all other classes except Sayyids, and even among themselves oach
house reckons itself higher than its neighbour. Among the clans,
though of high descent, they are now at a discount. Those that might
be admitted their equals, such as Chibs or Gakk hars, despise them;
while to lower classes they themselves will not stoop; and the con-
sequence is that social relations are sometimes at a dead-lock.” The
description applies with equal truth to the Mughals of the Delhi ter-
ritory. Even on the frontier the Mughals do not bear a good name.
“ The Mughals tyrannize over the cultivator, and the cultivator over
the earth ”; and again : “ Trust not the Mughal's letters. Of the
Mughals, first letters, then armies."
The Mughals are distributed very widely over these Provinces; but
are, excepting Delhi, most numerous in the western Districts, and more
especially in Ráwalpiodi, Jhelum, and Hazára. It is certain that a
very large number of these men are not Mughals at all. Some, pro-
bably a considerable number of them, belong to agricultural tribes
locally known by tribal names, such as Gakkhars, Sattis, Ghebas, and
the like, who bave set up an almost certainly groundless claim to
Mughal origin. Many of these have already been noticed. But more
than this there is a tendency, apparently confined to Delhi, the Ráwal-
pindi division and Peshawar for men of low caste to call themselves
Mughals just as throughout the Provinces they call themselves Shaikhs.
Colonel Wace was of opinion that recent Ját converts to Muhammadanism
often take the title of Mughal. Of the true Mughal tribes, only the
Chughatta and the Barlás seem to be numerously represented in the
Punjab. Men so returned are probably true Mughals.
One of the mysteries of Punjab ethnology is the question, what has
become of all the Mughal hordes wbich entered India long before



on of more fourth of this countries are moldoermitted to
newcomersee happy 2 ohina
Mughalkhel-Muhammadzas.
181
the time of Bábur?' The author of the Tabagát-i-Násiri draws &
lamentable picture of the ravages of the dog-faced Mughals' and the
terror they inspired.
Bernier however throws considerable light upon the significance of
the term Mughal in the time of Aurangzeb. He describes them
foreigners whose complexions are white, and who profess Mahomete
anism ; such as Persians, Turks, Arabs and Usbeks. They generally
used the bow.* He points out that 'the Great Mogol is a foreigner in
Hindustán, and finds himself in an hostile country or nearly 60 ; &
country containing hundreds of Gentiles to one Mogol, or even to one
Mahometan. His armies are composed either of natives such as
Ragipores or Patans, or of genuine Mogols and of people who, though
less esteemed, are called Mogols because white men, foreigners, and
Mahometans. The court itself does not now consist, as originally, of
real Mogols; but is a medley of Usbecs, Persians, Arabs and Turke
or descendants from all these people ; known, as said before, by the
general appellation of Mogols. It should be added, however, that
children of the third and fourth generation who have the brown
complexion, and the languid manner of this country of their nativity,
are held in much less respect than new comers, and are seldom invested
with official situations : they consider themselves happy if permitted to
serve as private soldiers in the infantry or cavalry.'t (2) A clan
(agricultural) found in Shahpur. (3) A Ját clan (agricultural) found
in Amritsar.
MOGLALKHEL, see under Wazír.
MUGALOTE, MOG ALOTE, a cognate branch of the Trakhané dynasty of Gilgit,
descended in the male line from a family wbose names bear the sufix
tham, to which belong the Thams or rulers of Nagar who io the pros-
perous days of Shin rule were feudatories of the Ráo of Gilgit, and
who, after that dynasty had been supplanted of the Trakbané, trans-
ferred their allegiance to it. Tradition says that they obtained Nilt
and several other villages as dowries with the daughters of the
Trakhanó whom they espoused.
MUHÁJARÍN.- The faithful who accompanied Muhammad in his hijrah or
Bight from Mecca were called Muhájarín or “ the fugitive3 or emi.
grants," and their descendants still retain the title. In tbe Karnál Dis-
trict 8,560 persons so returned themselves in 1881, and are doubtløse the
mon of Pánipat.
Muhálá, MUHANDRA, a chief headman.--Panjabi Dicty., p. 763.
MUHAMMADKHEL, (1) an agricultural clan found in Shahpur; (2) see under
Isperka ; aod (3) under Orakzai.
MUHAMMADZAI, MOHAMANDZAI or MÁMANZAI, a Pathán tribe which holds
Hashtnagar, a strip of territory some 13 miles broad running down the
left bank of the Swát river from our border to Naushahra. Descended
through Muhammad, Mohmand or Máman, one of the sons of Zamand,
from Kharshabún, it is divided into eight sections, the Cháreadda,
Práng, Razzar, Sherpao, Tangi (with its Barazai and Nasraizai sub-
* Travels, Constable's Edn., 1891, p. 98. I am indebted for this and the following
reference to Dr. J. Hororitz.
† Ibid. p. 309.



182
Muhána-Muhiál.
sections), Turangzai, Umarzai and Utmánzai. With them are settled a
few descendants of Muhammad's brothers, from one of whom, Kheshgi,
one of their principal villages is named.
Morina, soe Mohána.
Moniál.-A sub-section of the Sársut Brahmans said to be so named from
the seven múhins or clans of which they consist. They are almost
confined to the sub-montane Salt Range tract. They say that certain
of their ancestors rose to high position under the Mughals, since wlien
they have abandoned all performance of priestly functions or claim to
a sacerdotal character, and cultivate land, but especially take service
in the army or as clerks. They object to be called Brahmans, as the
enlistment of Brahmans is said to be forbidden in our army. This is
their own account ; but in Hazára proper the Mubiáls perform priestly
functions and receive alms and oblations just ļike other Brahmans.
Another story derives their name from a place called Mava,* now
deserted.
The Muhiál are progressive community and a Muhiyal Gazette is
published at Kala in Jhelum. They appear to have no historical re-
cords, but possess a number of kabits, of some historical interest. A
lengthy ancritical accountt of the coinmunity gives the following
particulars,t of the Muhiál clans :-
Clan.
Gotra.
Origin,
1. Datt ...)
Descended from Drona Achárya, military tutor to
Bhardwaj ... the Pandavas, and son of Bhardwój. From his
2. Vaid ... )
) other son Dhanwantar are sprung the Vaid.
3. Chhibbar... Bhargav ... Descended from Parasu Ráma.
4. Báli ... Parasher ... Descended from Parasher through Bálmík.
5. Mohan ... Káshap.
6. Lau ... Bashist
7. Bbimwal... Koshal.ş
This work describes the above-mentioned ancestors of the clans as
ráj-rishis or rishis possessed of temporal power, as opposed to the
brahm rishis who lean a secluded life. It goes on to say that the
Punjab, extending beyond the confines of Peshawar, was ruled by
Brahman and Kshatriya Rájás, while all the hilly tract from the Indus
to the Siwálik was in possession of the Ghakkars who are, as usual,
mistaken for the Khokkars. From these Brahman rulers the Muhiáls
are believed to be descended, and it is not impossible that the Brahman
dynasty of Kábul sprang from a class of secular Brahmads from which
the Muhiáls may be descended. It is also suggested that the name
Muhiál is derived from mahi, land, so that it means "land-holder';
and a connection is claimed with the Bhunhár or Bhumihár|l commnnity
of Bihar and the United Provinces on the somewhat slender groond
that they, like the Chhibbars, claim descent from Parasu Ráma.
* Mava suggests that the name was Man, for the conjectural meaning of which see
under Máwi.
+ The History of the Muhiyals, the militant Brahman race of India, by P.T. Russell Stracey,
Lahore, 1911, which contains a number of the kabits. They are under publication in the
Punjab Histrical Society's Journal in a complete form.
* In addition to those given at pp. 121-2 of Vol. II.
$From whom the Kushal Des is said to take its name, but the situation of the Koshal
Des is not described.
il Meaning 'land-owner. The clan name Bhibhál or Bhimwál may, of course, have a
similar meaning.



The Muhiál clans.
133
The Muhiál have several customs which are in harmony with their
secular professions. To each clan are or should be attached a parohit
or family priest, a bhít vr bard, and a mírási or genealogist. Before
attaining the age, which varies in the different clans but is generally
5 years, at which the sacred thread is donned, a Muhiál boy wears a
long strong thread of black wool, called the Mohial's pair., which
loosely encircles his neck, is passed down touching his stoinach and
than tied round his loins. This thread is renewed half-yearly on the
naurátra ashtami. Some families nark the boy's forehead with blood
drawn from his right arm with a razor when he doos the sacred
thread. The next ceremony in his life is that of the mundan or jhand,
when his head is shaved, generaliy in his 5th year also. A male lamb
with a jet black head and spotlessly white body is taken to a jand tree
(prosopis spicigera), under whose-shade all the boy's relatives congre-
gate. He is then seated in bridal array on an inverted basket with a
lamp lit under it and surrounded by earthen pots. The lamb's head is
next rubbed with curds, and washed with water. Its ear is slightly
punctured and the boy's forehead marked with the blood. His head
is then shaved and descending from the basket he jumps on the pots,
breaking them in pieces. His parents are félicitated, the women sing
songs and the party breaks up. The lamb is eventually eaton sacra-
mentally, only Muhiáls being permitted to share it, but the women are
bound to taste its flesh even though they are strict vegetarians. Some
families substitute a lamb made of sweet-stuff for the living animal,
and indeed the rites vary in detail in the different clans.
The origins assigned to the clan-names are curious. Datt is with
some probability said to menn 'generous.'* Others see in it a corrupa
tion of Aditya, ‘Law-giver,' and some hold that it means 'given or
bestowed in adoption' because a Kshatriya Rájá adopted & Brahman
lad. The kabits actually declare that the Dalt were once in Arabia
the partizans of Hasan and Husain and that Rahib,t a Datt.warrior,
defended the survivors at Kerbela until he was compelled to retire with
the remnant of his band to India, through Persia and Kandahár. The
kabits , also encourage the belief that after the war of the Maha-
bharata, Droną Acharya's siin Asthutháma settled in Arabia with a
large following, his descendants being called by his name and also
Asthutha. They returned to the Puojab by a circuitous and obviously
mytbical route. But whatever the truth as to the Datts' connection
with Arabia may be, they were certainly called Pathan, and in Bábar's
line Rai Midb, a descendant of Rai Sidh, took possession of the
Pathankot territory and made his capital at Paniár, after defeating
Rájá Mín, whence a section of the Datt was styled Mín-gatái. But
Bábur despatched a force against the victors and they were almost
annibilated in the battle at Paniár. No Datt will drink water at or
* Cf. Lakhdátta, the 'giver of lákhs'-a title of Sakhi Sarwar.
+ The Knower of God.' His name was Rai Sidh Datt, and he had seven sons, Sabus Rai,
Harjas Rai, Shor Khán (sic), Rám Singh, Rai Pun, `Dhoro and Púro. He lost all his sons
in tho conflict, and on his way back to the Punjab ha met one Pir Wiáhum, à chess player
near Nankána (? Nandana) whose stake in the game was the loser's head. The Pir
invariably won, but was often ready to accept the loser's conversion to Islám in lieu of his
head. Rai Sidh Datt however won three heads from the Pir and when offerer bis head and
those of his wife and son he forgave him the debt. (Ráhib, lit. 'fearing' (God) is a term
applied to a Christian monk or recluse. Lane's Arabic Dicty. 8.0., p. 1168.]



134
Muhiál cians.
near Padiár or pass a night there to this day. Tradition says that the
Datts chivalrously refused to surrender to Bábur a girl who had taken
refuge with them. They were, however, betrayed by a servant and
few escaped massacre, but an illness of Bábur's son Humáyún was
ascribed to divine displeasure at their treatment and Bábur sought out
the survivors of the tribe. To one he assigned Kanjrúr with 15
villages* in the Shakargarh tabsil of Gurdaspur and to another Zafar-
wál Dattán in the Raya tahsil of Sialkot. Many Datt families in
Gurdaspur have the title of Khán, and one section of the clan is still
called Datt Aláwal Khán, indicating that it is descended from a Datt
who bore the cognomen of Aláwal Khan though he was not converted
to Islám. It was the boast of the Datts that they never paid revenue to
any authority without being coerced by armed force.
The Chibbarst claim that their ancestor Narsingh Deo lived at Mathra,
whence his descendants moved through Bbaginda to Bhatner. Later
Maháráj, a Chibbar, one of the sons of Rájá Dáhar, established his
power at Bhadarwáli or Bhadrawári, the modern Bhurari or old Bhera,
which lay on the Jhelum near Ahmadabad. The old garhi of the
Chibbars is, however, said to be traceable in the area of Chak Qázi pear
new Bhera in Shahpur. Tradition also declares that Rájá Dáhar de-
feated a Sultán on the banks of the Amrávatif across which river the
beaten army fled; and Dáhar's victory was proclaimed at Gujrat.
Dáhar's other sons were Narain, who held the Siálkot country, Bhawan,
Jangu and Chham, Later on Gajú, a descendant of Bhawan, held
Bhera and his son Thar Pál founded Thar Chak in its territory. The
ruins of his fort are said to be still traceable. In the time of Bablol
Lodi it was held by Rájá Gautama who with his forces perished fight-
ing with the Muhammadans. His son Bába Parága founded Kariála
in the Chakwal tahsil of Jhelum. The Chibbars of and around Bhera
lead the lamb at the mundan into the innermost room of the house,
wash its head, place antinomy in its eyes aod cloth it. It is then re-
verenced, killed and eaten, the fragments being scrupulously collected
and buried in the room. All this is done with the utmost secrecy, none
but Chibbars being permitted even to witness the rites. The Chibbar
played no inconsiderable part in the history of Sikbism. They claim
to have once practised female infanticide.
· Mathra was also the earliest home of the Bális, and their ancestor
Tarlok Náth accompanied the prinres Dharopat and Sbripat when
exiled from that territory, together with an ancestor of the Bhimwáls.
They took possession of the modern Katás in Jhelum and Tarlok Náth's
shrine at Malot is still a resort of Báli pilgrims. He left four sons, and
the descendants of one, Isar, are still known by that name in the
Pothohár, but they include also the descendants of his brother Bamın.
The Vaids appear to claim descent from Rai Gorakh Pai, a courtier of
Rai Pithora. On his death at the battle of Thánesar his descendants
sought refuge in the Simla hills, and one of them, Shiv Datt Rám, became
a noble at the Jammu court. When Mal Deo of Jammu rescued many of
..
* Including Viram.
+ Chhibbar appears to be more correct.
Clearly the Rávi is meant Dáhar clearly drove the Sultán from the banks of the
Rávi and followed up his victory as far west as Gujrát. This Sultán cannot possibly, have
been Muhammad bin Qasim,



Muhiál clans.
135
Tímúr's Hindu captives in 1382 this noble so distinguished himself
that he obtained the dheri or fief of Sámba with the title of Rai and his
descendants rank as dheridárs, but in the Sindh Sagar Doab the
Auwána Vaids take that rank, though in the Punjab proper the Vaids
of Sámba are recognised as senior to the Auwána.
The Lau clan is closely associated with Bajwára, the old capital of
what is now the Hoshiarpur District. Ballar Sain, son of Indar Sain
Lau, aided Tímúr on his return march along the foot of the Siwáliks
and acted as intermediary between him and the Hill chiefs. In return
Tímúr granted him the fief of Bajwára but his descendants forfeited
it for not assisting Aurangzeb's forces against the Sikhs. Still the
descendants of Sur Sain, a descendant of Ballar Saiv, rank as dheridárs
of Bajwára.
The Bhimwáls claim descent from the Rájá Nandana who held the
fort of that name* in the Pind Dádan Khan tabsil of Jhelum. They
were driven from Makhiála by the Janjúas, but they still have their
crematorium there.
The Mohans also found favour with Tímúr, who is said to have
appointed one of them his Diwán, and during the reign of Sultán
Muhammad Khán two Mohans founded Dhankot on the Indus. Under
Bábur Harjas Rại Mohan became Díwár. and Muhammadap titles were
bestowed on the clan, but they retained their faith. He made or
allowed them to become masters of Mamdot, but Humáyún checked
their progress. Nevertheless Sobha Rám Thákur rose to eminence at
the Delhi court and was able to restore all their lands to the Datts of
Viram in Gurdáspur when they had been dispossessed by the Játs. The
clan was, however, only just saved from extinction. Under Muham-
mad Shah's rule Jai Rám, the son of Diwán Sádhu Rám Mohan, was
half forced to embrace Islám under the name of Thákur Shah, but the
Mobans determined to rescue him. They challenged the emperor and
he sent an army against Mamdot. When it reached Dhankott the
Mohans were called upon to submit, but they refused and defended
Mamdot with success, until the emperor brought up a vast force and
defeated them with great slaughter near Dhankot. For the second
time the Mohans were nearly exterminated but, as on the former oc-
casion, Thákur Shah induced his father to remarry, and in commemo-
ration of his exertions the Mohans give alms and distribute sweets at
weddings and other festivals in the name of Jai Rám or Khoja or Bábá
Janjúán as he was also called. On such occasions Mohan females also
give away a loța and food in memory of Sobha Rám Thakur's sur-
render of his Datt bride to his father when the Mohans were once be-
fore on the verge of extinction.
The Mohans claim that they obtained a grant of Mam dot in jágír from
Ala-ud-Din Khilji early in the 14th century. However this may be,
the descendants of Phanan Rao are called dheridárs from the dheri of
* Its ruins are said to be still visible near Baganwala.
+ This cannot be Dhankot on the Indus, which they lost to Sultán Ma'sud, it is said.
It was then made over to the Awáns. The Mohans lived for some time under the protection
of the Khokhars (pot the Gbakkbars probably) and then migrated to Hindustan.



186
Múlá-Mullagorí.
Mamdot. In the reign of Aurangzeb some of the Mohan accepted
Islam and are now called Mahtas. They are agriculturists at Mamdot.
Those who refused conversion sought refuge with the Datts in Viram
but they fled to the hills during Nadir Shah's invasion and never re-
turned. The Mohans are the smallest clan of the Muhiáls.
That female infanticide was once practised among the Muhiáls, es-
pecially by the Chibbar and Datt, is probably true. Three excuses are
advanced for it. Firstly, the cost of dowries, and the custom which re.
quired a married daughter, who visited her parents, to return to her
husband's house with gifts equal in value to her original dowry. This
penalised such visits to such an extent that a daughter was virtually dead
to her parents after her marriage ; secondly, the difficulty of protecting
women in times when war was incessant; and thirdly the artificial re-
striction of the marriage circles due to inter-tribal rules. In certain
cases a Muhiál may take a bride from an ordinary Brahman family and
this has frequently been done by the noblest Muhiáls, but the converse
case would not be tolerated.
Múlá, a term applied to a few Játs in Rohtak who were forcibly converted
to Islám. They are found scattered in all three tahsils of that District
and are described as exceedingly inferior to Hindu Játs.
MULAKHEL, a clan of Pathans found in the Marwat plain, though not Marwat
by origin, and assimilated to the Marwats by intermarriage. They
are descended from one Hazrat Bilál, a Habshi (Abyssinian) saint, and
besides having two villages of their own, are found in every village in
Marwat.
MULLAGORí, a tribe of doubtful Pathán origin: Lying north of the Afrídi
they hold the Tartara country north of the Kbaibar range and are a
small and inoffensive but thievish tribe associated with the hill Moh-
mands. The Mullagoris of Tartara, like the Sáfis, hold their lands by
sufferance of the Mohmands ; they acknowledge their inferiority and are
bound to pay the Khán of Lalpura occasional tribute and to hospitably
entertain Mohmands passing through their villages. It is not impro-
bable that the Mullagoris are relics either cf the now humble Dilazaks
· who were swept away before the irruption of the Afgháns or that they
are remnants of the bands of Bayazíd, the notorious Pír Roshan who
Bourished in the time of Akbar, and descendants of whose followers may
exist in the so-called Shias of Tíráh. Tiny settlements of Mullagoris
are also found on the outskirts of the great eastern tribes, at Tsitsobi,
where A frídi meets Shinwári, on the eastern slopes of Tartara, the
border between Peshawar and the Mohmands, and at Sapri above
Abazai on the Otmán Khel frontier. Their own traditions proclaim
them to be the relics of a great kingdom, whose capital was somewbere
near Pesh Bolak, which would favor the Dilazák theory. The Mulla-
goris are not acknowledged as Pathans by the Mohmands, Shinwáris or
A frídis. The Shinwáris say they are descendanis of an illegitimate
child found in a grave-yard, whence their name. Others say they are
descended from Mulla whose father, Bakhtiar, was a slave or follower
of Pir Tárík, and who was daputed to watch Akhund Darwoza, the Pir's
great rival.



Mulláh--Músá Khel.
187
of Mullás.*
These con
ose howersassins stil Prof. E. G. the Westema
Thang Bár they get a mething from
MULLÁN, MULLÁH.-The mulláh or maulavi is a Muhammadan doctor of
divinity who teaches the precepts of the faith. Mullána or mulwána
appears to be merely another form of the title in use in the Western
Punjab and North-West Frontier Province. Prof. E. G. Browne says -
that rempants of the sect of the Assassins still survive in Chitral under
the name of Mullás.* These however would appear to be the MAULÁJK.
Mulláhs are of any tribe. In the Jhang Bár they get a rupee or two
for calling the báng in the ears of a new-born child: and something from
the parents of both parties, especially from the bride's, at a marriage :
also wash the dead and get grain or money at burials. Circumcision
is done not by Mulláhs but by Náis or piráhins (Bharáis).
Multání, (1) a resident of Multán : (2) a potter in Gurgaon-the potter's
work there being often done by men from Multán..
MUND, a tribe, found in Jhelum, reckoned as Awán : see Gang.
MUNDA, a sect of Hindu mendicants who shaved off all bair, even the eye.
brows, and collected at a place of pilgrimage 40 leagues from Delhi
(probably tho Pokhar Lake) for bathing. Under Aurangzeb they advanc-
ed on Delhi at the behest of an old sorceress and routed 10,000 horse
sent ont by the emperor to oppose them, but finally succumbed. See
Satnámi. Mapucci : Storia da Mogor (Irvine's Trans.), II, 167-8.
Munda, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
MONDTOR.—A sept of Játs. They live in and round Farmána in Rohtak,
and are really Gallat Játs, wbo received this nickname from breaking
the heads of some Brahmans. From such an incident a new clap may
be formed, as was also thé case of the Siroha Játs in Gohána, who are
styled Maliks, and the Gothia ? (Golia) in Jhajjar, who, like the Mund.
tor, are Gallat Jats.
Mogain, a minor caste of Muhammadans.
Muní, a devotee.
Munís, MUNÍsar, a recluse, an ascetic.
MUNIÁR, -ÁRÁ, fem. -í. A worker in glass, a maker of glass bangles : see
under Maniár.
MONsbiál, an enterprising family of Talwar Khatrís, settled at Bhaun in
Jhelum
MURDÁNÁ, a principal clan of the Baloch which possesses much land on the
main road from Multán to Lahore, between Gugera and Harappa. Also
said to be a clan of the Siáls.t
Musa, seo under Hatikhel.
Moss KHEL, (1) a Pathán clah (agricultural) found in Amritsar: (2) a branch
of the Nházi Patháne, found on the banks of the Indus in Mianwali : (3)
& section of the MARNAT Po tháns : (4) one of the branches of the Panni
Pathans : it has two sub-divisions, the Balilzai, with several sections,
and the La brzai : (5) one of the five main sections of the Plain Moe
MAND: (6) see under Mián Khel.
* Literary Hist. of Persia, II, p. 460.
† Chenab Colony Ganettoer, p. 16.



bord. In the
border he is the term mislam calls h
138
Musaddi-Mutti.
MUSADDI, see Mutsaddi.
MUBALLÁ-NASAín, one who is seated on a musallá, '& carpet or mat to pray
on, a place of prayer.' Especially applied to a female who does not marry,
but leads a religious life in her parental home.
MUSALLI, the Muhammadan Chubțá of the Western Punjab. The term is
commonly used west of Lahore as a synonym of Kutána, bat Musalli
is chiefly used in the north-west and Kutána io the south-west. As
long, however, as a Chuhſá convert continues to eat carrion or remove
night-soil he is often called a Chuhrá and only promoted to the title of
Musalli when he abandons those habits, the Musalli ranking distinctly
above the Chuhjá. In the frontier towns, however, he removes night-
soil, and on the Pesbáwar border he is the grave-digger as well as
sweeper, and also called SHADI KHEL. The term means literally one
who prays. If at all literate a Mihtar converted to Islám calls himself
a Nau-Musallim. He is initiated by the usual rite, i.e. he is made to
repeat the Mohammadan creed (kalima) 5 times, after bathing and
dressing in new clothes. He must then say toba (repentance) in a clear
firm voice and vow never to return to his old faith thrice before a
Maulavi and other witnesses. After this the Maulavi drinks from a
vessel, out of which the convert drinks also, and is then pronounced &
Musalmán.*
MUSAZAT, OR Músá KAEL: see under Mián Khel.
MUSHẤNI, a clan of the Kháka branch of the Niazi Pathans, settled to the
south of the Isá Khel in the country between the Kohát Salt-range and
the Indus. They and the Sarhangs have overshadowed the other clans
of the Kbáku.
Musiáni, a branch of the Niázı Patháns, descended from Kháko.
Muslá, fem. -1, a person of the Musalman connection ; used contemptuously
and disrespectfully by Sikhs. Panjabi Dicty., p. 781. From it are
derived the adjectives Muslakká, Muslakkaş and Muslaţtá.
MUSRERA, a Kharral clan (agricultoral) found in Montgomery.
MUTRAB, MOTRIB,+ a musician, a class of Mírásis or a synonym for that name.
The Mutrib was the principal of the castes which the Thags would not
kill. I In Saháranpur (United Provinces) the Mutrib is described as the
highest class of Mirási-Dams; it can only take alms from Sayyids and
Shaikhs. They sing at weddings and other festivities, rocounting the
deeds of Hasan, Husain and Ali.
MOTSADDI, Musaddi, an accountant.
MUTTI, a Hindu Karboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
* P. N. Q. III, 8 610.
The term mutrid appears to be of Arabic origin : cf. mutarabbi, skillod, educatod,
trained.' Catafago's Arabic Dicty., p. 382.
The others were the Kanjari, prostitute, Dom, Bhát, Dhobi and Nai.
Š N. I. N. Q., IV, $ 259,



189
.
N '
NACHAŅO, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multan.
Nách, a class of women procured by the Kanjars from their parents or
otherwise for purposes of prostitution. They have a much lower posi.
tion than the Kanjaris or women of the Kanjar caste.
Napsát, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
NADHE, (1) a Muhammadan Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery;
(2) an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Nadko, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Náda, a religious mendicant, often a militant member of an order, sev, 8.g.,
under Dádupanthi, Bairagi and Saniási.
NAGALU, NA01.0, see Sapela.
NAGÁRA, one of the principal clans of the Chímas, found chiefly in the
Pasrúr tahsil of Sialkot, whither they migrated from Delhi viâ Jullundur.
Nagára was their eponym and their Brahmans are said to be Maders
Nagára appears to be a misprint for Nágra in the Hist. of Sialkot, pp..
30, 41 and 68.
Nánar (vide Náhar).
NAQIẢNA, a holy clan, small in numbers, but owning upwards of 10,000 acres
in the Shahpur Bár. It lies south-west of the Gondals.
Nágpál, an A ráín clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. -
NÁGBI (? Nagára), a clan of Játs which is found in Gurdaspur and also in
Sialkot. It holds 17 villages in the latter District.' It claims to be
Chauhán Rájput by origin and to have migrated from Delhi in the time
of Alá-ud-Din Ghori, See also under Nagára.*
NÁHAR,' lion,' a section of the Bhábļas.
NABAR, (1) A branch of the Lodi Pathán dynasty whose name is said to
have been given them on account of their rapacity, nahar meaning tiger'
in Sanskrit. Raverty calls them Nághars and says they are Ghorgasht
Patháns, being descended from Nághar, one of the four sons of Dánai,
son of Ismail the Ghorgasht, and so akin to the Kákar, Dáwai and
Parnai. Náyhar had two sons, Yúnas and Dumas or Dumash.t Little
is known of this Afghán tribe. Never very numerous they once held all
the hill country from near Nigáhá or Sakhi Sarwar Pass to the south,
* For Nágarás among the Wániás of Guzerat, the Gujars of Bulandshahr and the Vágar -
Brahmans, and the theory hat these tribes all originated at Nagarkot in Kángņa, see Bhan.
darkar's Foreign Elements in the Hindu Population, Indian Ant., XL, pp. 32-35.
+ Yúnas had six sons :-- Palkat, Mián Kházo the saint, Matro or Mataro, Chandran and
Chondro, and two others whose names are forgotten. Dumas had six also, viz., Bihzad or
Bibrand. Trak, Randak, Salin, or Salatai, Sílánch and Abd-ur-Rahmán. Mián Kházo was
a contemporary of Dzár, son of Sheránai. Another Nághar saiat was Mona, who was also
widoly venerated among the Afgháns.:



140
Naherná Singh-Nai.
comprising the southern parts of the Koh-i-Siyah or Sulaimán Range,
where it trends to the west and is much mixed up with the lower ranges
of the Roh-i-Surkh or 'red range. At the height of their prosperity
the Nághara spread east and south into the plains of the Indus Valley,
and they are said to have once held the tracts round Harrand, Siw
Sitpur and Kinkot near that river. As a tribe they were gradually
dispossessed by the Baloch, but some of them are still found as hamsay 28
of the Kási Kbetráns, and a few among the Dumar Kákass. Of all
their tribe, the Silánchis alone appear to have preserved their name.
As a dynasty the Nabars rose to power under Islám Khán, a kingman
of Bahlol Lodi, who had charge of the southern part of the Multán
province, including Sitpur, now in Muzaffargarh, Kia in Dera Gházi
Khan and Kashmor in Sind, all then on the right bank of the Indus.
He cut himself adrift from the Langáh at Multán and set up an indi-
pendent government au Sítpur. But the Mirráni Baloch soon came
into conflict with the Nahars who had extended their dominion north-
ward from Sítpor over Harrand and Dajal, but were expelled from those
tracts by Ghazi Khan in 1482 A. D. The Nahar territory thus dimin-
ished was soon divided betweer Kásim Khán, a grandson of the first
Islám Khán, who hold the southern part, and Islám Khán his brother
who held the northern, with Sitpur. The Mazári Baloch expelled the
Nabars from Kín in the 16th century,* and the Nahars of Sitpur fell
into decay about the same time as the Mirraois, i.e., about 1739.
Makhdúm Shaikh Rajant usurped part of their territories and expelled
them from Sítpur. The Nhaar also appear to have been called Babar
which means 'lion.' (2) A Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
NAHERNÁ SINGH, a Sikh barber. Panjábi Dicty., p. 790.
Nái, fem. NÁIN.-The Náís form a very highly organised occupational caste,
which performs several distinct functions, and which, as a rule, jealously
protects itself against the admission of strangers in blood into its fold.
The word nái is unquestionably derived from the Sanskrit nápika,
one who cleans nails.' Folk-etymology; however, derives nái from
nahná, a word not given in the dictionaries, and declares it to mean one
who never refuses '-because once upon a time Akbar bade Bir Bal
bring him an an-mulla slave, one, that is, who worked without wages.
Bír Bal produced a Nái, whom the emperor cent with a message to
Kábul. The Nái set out at once without asking for reward, wages or
even provision for his journey, and thus earned the title of an-mulla.
The Náí boasts many titles, honorific and the reverse. Among
Hindus he is styled Thákur or even Rajá, his wife being called Rání, and
the two latter titles are especially used on ceremonial occasions. Thus
in Kapúrthalá on a patron's death, the women mourners address the
family Nží as Rája and his wife as Rání, and lament bitterly. So too
at betrothals and weddings the Nái exercises authority and is entitled to
a seat in the presence of the brotherhood.
* Qiim Khán Nahar resided at Rin. He quarrelled with his kinsman, Islám Khán,
governor of Bhággar and allowed the Hazáris to settle in his country in return for an alliance
with them against Islám Khán. According to Hetu Rám the Nábars still hold Bbagaar :
Trans. of the Bilochináma, p 88.
| The founder of Rajanpur.



Nái synonyms.
141
Another. -title is Khás in Nábha or in the Bagar Khwas, which has
much the same meaning as Lági. The latter term, which means
recipient of dues,' is applied especially to the Náís as they are the
chief recipients of lágs at all social ceremonies. Another similar term
is neogi, from neg, a rite, in Hissár. Kbwás is also the professional
title of the Nái in the Deraját.
Seeing that the strict Sikhs do not cut the hair or beard, it might
be assumed that they possess no barbers, but this is not the case.
The Sikhs retain their barber dependents, who are styled Naberná,
lit. an instrument for cutting the nails.*
In Shahpur the Hindu Náis are locally termed Jájak, from the Sang.
rit yachak, 'beggar,' and comprise three gots (i) Manchadda,
k Brahmí (Bashist gotra), (iii) Dháin (Bhardwaj gotra), which inter-
marry with one another and with the Mithra and Sidh-bel gots in
Pesháwar.
In Kohát the same caste performs the functions of the barber and
those of the Dúm or drummer of the Punjab. It is known as the
Dam, and its members are also cooks at weddings, messengers, circum-
cisors, etc. Every Pathán village has its Dam, but as the proverb says
Rego chile nishta, Damo kilé nishta, 'grains of sand do not make a pillar
or Dams a village.' Dancing boys, gadidún or lakhti, are also drawn
from this class to perform at Pațhán weddings. Dams intermarry and
also marry with Patháns, apparently on equal terms. They are not a
servile class, but hold their own, receiving grain at each harvest as well
as special fees at births, circumcisions, and weddings. Some of them
are skilfull chefs, employed by wealthy families and those of Togh in
Hangu talisil are described as affluent. The Dam in this District show
some regard for the olive tree, but do not hesitate to use it for domestic
purposes. Otherwise they are as good Muhammadans as the Patháns.
In Bannú the Nát is said to be called Dúm, which probably means
that the Púm is also a barber.
The Naí is also called Usta, or 'barber,' at any rate in Jind.t
Among Muhammadans the barber is termed Hajjám, lit. 'one who
sacrifices.' Honorifically he is styled Khalifa.
Territorial groups. The Náís have few territorial groups. In Hissár
are two-the Deri and Márwárí, which intermarry, though very rarely,
The former keep the madhpurakhỉ rite at weddings: the latter do not.
* The Panjabi Dicty. gives naherná singh as a Sikh barber.'
+ Of. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1176.
* Madh -purakh or barg : when Rám Chandra married Síta, he wanted a Náí to carry the
madhúbarg, or cup containing honey and milk offere i to the bridegroom, on his arrival
at his father-in-law's gate, in front of the bride. So he made & Náí out of the batnu
which had been washed off his body and thus the Nái was called Gola. In Sirmár, ibo
Hindu Náis are divided into four sáts-Banbherú, Siribástú, Gola and Bári. All tour
practise karewa, The Banbheru 'alone are found in Nában tahsil, and their gots are :
Samela, Keli, Sihpál and Gokar. They avoid four gots in marriage. They have panchayate
and their chauntra is at Biláspur in Ambála.
In T. Paonta there are two kháps, Banbberu and Gola, who used to smoke together untu
50 years ago, and they still eat and drink together. Rám Chandra wanted a Nái and so he
made one out of kha grass when he was banwás (living in exile in the forest) whence the



142
The Náí organisation.
Caste organisation.- Socially the Náis have a complex and interesting
system of social groups, which vary in different parts of the Province, and
the clue to their intricacies is to be looked for in the social organisation
of their dominant patron caste in the locality.
: The Hindu Nais.
Thus in the south-eastern Districts of the Punjab the Náis are
divided into two main kháps, which are sub-castes, the Bhanbheru and
the Gola. lo this part the Náís' organisation reflects that of the Brah.
mans. Elsewhere they follow those of the Khatrís.
Advancing towards the north and west the Gola sub-caste gradually
disappears, but it is known to exist in Jind, where the groups are three
in pomber:-
| I-Bhanbaru không ... ...)
N 1 Gold* khóp ... .. ... forming Dhaí, i.e., 21 kháps.
. III.---Bárt, a half khhpire ...
The Bhanbhern kháp is again divided into 5 hypergamous groups :-
1. Dhái (27) .......
or group of 8 gots.
2.
8. Barbi ? 12).
4. Bunjáhí (58).
To the above groups, I to III, the Lahore account adds a fourth half
pháp, a. :-
IV.-The Sribás,which is said to comprise the Purbia Náis.
In Máler Kotla, however, the Sribás are said to be the same as the
Budjáhí, who are not found in that State.
These groups in Lahore comprise the following gots :-
(1) Kapárll
li Dháis ...
... 3 (ii) Jasdhol ** } Three in all.
( (iii) Narmáng
Ohhåll (6)
...
...
P.
name Banbheru. When he married Síta he made a nái as already described-whonce
the term Gola. The Gola and Banbheru groups are endogamous.
Pandhír is a Banbheru got. It was a Rájput got and a Pandhír married a Chauhan girl
who had a mare as her dowry and the Pandhír, in jest, named the mare Chaubáni. Her
brother heard of it and the bride in her shame threatened to destroy herself. The Chauhans
attacked the Pandhírs. A Náin saved a Pandbír boy from the massacre, saying he was a
Nái, and brought him up. He founded the Pandhír got of the Náis. The chaudhri, who
is also called chauntrú, has power to fine or outcaste, and his house is distinguished by a
chauntra in which the panchayats are held. He has two chobdárs who at every wedding or
funeral get a rupao as their due. At weddings they also get clothes from the boy's
parents. The Chaudhri also gets a rupee at each wedding and the fines (chatti) are deposited
with him, and spent on the general purposes of the brotherhood. He is like a rájá and on
his death one of his sons succeeds him. His office is hereditary and can only be transferred
to another family under special circumstances. The Náis are worshippers of Bain Bhagat
whose name they utter when using a razor.
* Found only in Dádrí, i.e., in the extreme south-east. -
+ The Bárí are very rare.
Io Patiảla there is no Chháí or group of six (gots)' but one of four, called Chár.
$ Possibly the same as the Siribástu in Birmúr.
| The Kapúr claim to be Khatris.
The Narmán were by origin Deot Rajputs,



The Niá organisation.
148
r (1) Jasso
I (ii) Majjhú *
2. Chbál ...
(iii) Kankariant
.? (iv) Chandalt
... sia in all.
(u) Lakkhiş
(vi) Písill
(1) Sarota
(ii) Siddhur
(iii) Rihán**
(iv) Bhutta
(u) Lakkhanpaltt
8. Bárhí ... .
(vi) Salopálft
(vii) Sandharátt
Twelve in all.
(viii) Bis
(iv) Goyál
(0) Pagarhat
(wi) Kale
(xii) Cháwalift
4. Tho Bunjáhí gots are very numerous.
In Lahore the Golas re-appear and, moreover, are now found with
an organisation similar to that among the Banbherus.
Hypergamous group.
(i) Thúthí Chapní
(ii) Menhdhe
Gots.
1. Dhái ...
... ..
s) Gándhí
*. Together forming an Ath, or
group of 8 gots.
2. Ohhái ....
...
...
(6) Sálaf
(ii) Joia :
iii) Lakkhí
... ? ivi Kalle
(v) Dáin
( (vi) Panní
* Majjhú is a corruption of Macbbfe and claims Sindhu Ját descent
+ Kankarián is a corruption of Kakkar and aro an offshoot of the Bhatti.
Chandal say their real name was Dal and that they are Bhatti Rájputs. Jandi sprang
from the Chhina Játs.
& Lakhi are Bhatti
1 Písí also claim Bhatti origin.
| Sarai sprang from the Goráya Játs and the Sidhu were also originally Játs of the
Sidhu tribe.
** The Rihán are said to be neither Hindu nor Musalman and not to be found in the
Punjab.
tf The Bhatti Náis are of course Bhatti by origin as are the Lakhanpád, Salopal, Sangra
and Sanobara.
11 In Amritsar the Báris are described as those who only marry into 12 sections. The
group is also called Cháwali, from its ancester Cháwal who was thus descended
Mahá Dov.
Ishar.
Dasand.
Harditta
Bhullar.
Anb.
Dehat.
Cháwal.
Some people say that there is no such kháp as Gola. It is really Goblan as shown below -
Mahádar.
LOT.
Sikhon.
Silach.
Goblan.



144
The Muhammadan Náis.
(i) Sanpone.
(i) Khauli,
(iii) Lakkhi.
(iv) Kanakwál.
(v) Nági.
3. Bárhí ... ...
(vi) Kapúr.
(vii) Ghamyáre.
(viii) Panni.
(iv) Kukkar.
(a) Lakkhanpál.
(wi) Chandel.
Lãii) Bhangá.
4. Bunjáhí, which comprises numerous gots.
In Lahore the Bárís also are said to have a precisely similar organisa-
tion, but they are very few in numbers and no gots are specified.
The Banbheru in Hissár almost always avoid four gots in marriage,
but in Gurgaon the number avoided depends on local custom.
The Banbheru in Hissar permit widow remarriage, but do not
allow an elder brother to marry his younger brother's widow. In
Máler Koțla all Hindu Náís, except the Golás, abominate karewa ;
the Golás comprising those who, having married women of other castes
or been gailty of karewa, have lost status. In Patiala the Banbherus
do not permit karewa, but the Kacha Bunjáhís practise it, and this
also appears to be the case in Nábha.
In Gurdaspur the local group of the Náis is called Dogra, and com-
prises thy following gots which have, as in Kángra, preserved their
gotras :-
Gotra.
Bhuta
.... Bhardwaji of Rajput origin.
Budhin
Uttar.
Gaur
Kundal, in Kangra.
Gujárú
Káshab, in
Kanian
Kekri
in Gurdaspur.
Khatolar
in Kángra.
Kholti
Madhwan
Mutlaoni*
Bhardwaji, Gurdaspur, Kangra.
Niban
Sardhúl
Barwani
Káshab, Kángra.
Sombhrat .... ..Uttar, Gurdáspur.
Got.
Kángre.
The Muhammadan Náis.
The Muhammadan Náís in Hissár have four sections, which are,
however, not exogamous. These are the Bhallam, Chaubán and
Kbaral. In Gurgaon they form two classes (c) the Shaikh or
Turkmán who came into India with the Muhammadan invaders, and
(ii) the Hindu Náís who were converted to Islám. The latter com-
prise Bhattis, Chaubáns, Nirbáns, Tanúrs, and Ghorias the latter
dating their conversion back to Muhammad of Ghor's time.
• Muthra, a famous Rajput, it is said, married a woman of a different caste and becamo a
barber. He founded this got.
+ Sombbrá is a Rájput tribe and one of its members married beneath him, turned barbor
and so founded this got of the Náís. -



The Muhammadan Náís.
145
Most of the Mubammadan Náis in Máler Koțla affect various saints,
such as Hazrat Bandagi of Sirhind, Sharf Alam in Máler Koțla, Bhikhe
Sháh of Jagrion, and Ghulam Rasúl at Baina in Ludhiába.
Regarding Hazrat Bandagi of Sirhiod it is said that once a pilgrim
visited him from afar, but the saint knew that the man had come to
test him aud so he bade his disciples have a dish of paláo in readi-
ness as the pilgrim would demand paláo to eat and a sight of God.
When the stranger arrived he said : paláo khiláu, Khudá miláu, 1.8.,
“ Give me to eat paláo and show me God.” After he had eaten of
the paláo the saint bade him close his eyes, and on re-opening them
he found himself in an ecstasy.
Pír Ghulam Rasul lived at Baina, and his brother at Baini close by.
In Rája Bhagwan Singh's time the brothers quarrelled about some
land and the case was adjudicated on by the Rájá. Neither party
being satisfied, it was decided that the land itself should proclaim its
owner, and it declared audibly, in the presence of the Kájá and all
his folk, that the pír was its master,
The Muhammadan Náis place great faith in the traditions and
commandments preserved in the Kisbatnáma, a kind of barbers' manual.
In this it is related that God first ordered Gabriel to shave Adam,
whose hirsute appearance displeased Eve after the expulsion from Eden,
with a flint. Thus Adam learned to shave, and handed down the art to
Sulaimán Páras, through Ali and his predecessors. The behests of
this Sulaimán are binding on the Náís and comprise such instructions
as these :-If the barber sit facing southward to shave a patron he
should recite a certain verse, but if he face north another is prescribed
on taking up the razor, and before using it; and when using it or its
hone; when using the scissors or naherná ; before extracting a tooth, or
after shaving a man; and when he wraps up his implements, a Nsi
must recite various texts. A novice, too, must shave five persons
gratis in God's name before he is authorised to keep a kisbat (as a case
of shaving implements is termed, though kisbat simply means ' earning'
in Arabic).
In Máler Kotla the Muhammadan gots are: -
Banbhorú.
| Chandel.
Khallar.*
Bhatti.
| Goria.
The Ban bherú, wbich here claims descent from a foundling, aban.
doned under a ban or oak,t and adopted by a Nái, has a saint of its
own, Shaikhá Dád (probably Alláh Dád) whose shrine is at Budínpur
in the Nábha State. At weddings Náís offer Re. 1-4 with some chúri
to this shrine.
In Patiala the Banbheru Náís converted to Islám have retained
their original caste system. They include the Turkmans or Turks,
the Gorias (by origin Rájputs), the Bhatti, Goráya, and Barab
Hajjams, all claiming Rajput descent, and the Husainis, who were
Brahmans.
In Bawal the Muhammadan Náís have gots, but no groups.
* Khallar, a bag made of skin, used by Bharáis as a wallet in which to place offerings of
food.
† As to other etymologies of Banbheru see infra.



the Turkmhe ghagra or skinnbheru , women en dress differently three
146
Group origins.
In Nábba the Muhammadan Náís of Phul and Amloh* have three
groups, Banbheru, Ghaghrel, whose women dress differently, and
Turkmán. Thus the Banbheru women wear trousers and the
Ghaghrel the ghagra or skirt. The latter come from Bhatindant and
the Turkmán from Amritsar. Each group is said to be endogamous
and the two first-pamed to have the following sections :-
Bhanbhery.
1 Goria.
Rora.
Aſklá (from Sérzut Híra.
Chit.
Brahmaps).
Kale (from Hussaini Brahmans). Náti.
Ghaghrel.
Khokhar.
Paeli.
Bhangu.
Piste.
In Lahore the Baubheru include four so-called gots : Bhanbi, Goria,
Panni and Khokhar. The Ghaghrel and Turkmán are also found.
The Panithe got claim Rájput origin and changed its (caste ?)
religion during a siege of Bhatinda. These gots are only proclaimed
when the Mírásís are paid their fees at weddings.
The Muhammadan Náis in Sialkot are either Kashmiri (with only
one got, Thukar) or Panjábi. The former are clients of the Kashmiri
immigrants from Jammu territory.
The Mohammadan Náis in Shahpur profess to have four groups,
the Arúbi, who-e avocation is surgery (jarráhi or blood.letting), the
Bhutta, who are barbers, the Manhás and the Bíbra whose special
callings are not stated.
The Suín,f a class of Muhammadan Náis found in Multán, state that
they derive their name from an eronym who belonged to Sapal and who
was given scis-ors by Bábá Farid to shave his mousiaches. The Suín
and Chau án affect Pír. Ghaus Bahá-ul-Haqq of Mulián. The Kolis
worship Pir Jiwana who lived in Jhang. The Najárí Sayı ads of
Baháwalpur are Pírs of the Joís. The Rolis and Jois 1 ? Joiya) appear
to be confined to Multán.
Jalál Umráni is worshipped, or at any rate reverenced, by Muhammadan
Náis in Dera Ismail. His name suggests sume connection with the
long-lived saint he lived for 275 years—whose shrine is at Mosul.
The Muhammadans of Persia are said to have been the first to save
and they, it is said, shaved the saint in question.
The Banbheru and Gola groups.
Various accounts are given of the origin of the Banbheras and
Golas. The Gülas in Hissár trace their origin to Ajmer, the Banbheruss
to Bhatner, Jaisalmir and Sambhar. In Gurgáon it is said that a
* The Muhammadan Náis of Phul and Amloh have a special custom rf effecting betrothal:
the girl's father places four copper coins in the boy's hand, and this act makes the contract
binding.
+ Ghaghrel is not a got but it is Gakhar. They connect their line with the Játs of the
.Kablon got. Turkmán is not a got," says a note from Amritsar.
1 The Súi or Soi is a tailor, eg., in Chamba.
☆ Folk-etymology has been very busy with Banbheru. It is not agreed as to its meaning.
One theory is that at Krishna's marriage a man was required to plait hair, so a wanderer in
the forests was engaged for the work and as he was called Banpheru so were his descend-
ants. Another is that there was no barber at the marriage of Bhagwánji's daughter and as
his presence was indispensable to its celebration, Bhagwán produced a human being from
a wan tree. The man was called Wap Bḥarų or 'borp of the wan,'



sribe the origine slaves of tofbier origeeded. *
The Nás caste government.
147
Banbheru Ját married a slave girl by karewa, and being excommuni.
cated took to barber's work as his trade.
That the Gola Náis look to the south-east as their original seat is
confirmed by the fact that they cause the first tonsure of their children
to be performed at Dhimhi in the Alwar State.
The word gola is derived usually from gola, slave, or gola, a ball,
and the legends which describe the origin of the Gola sub-caste are
based on these two meanings. They were slaves of the Khatris, says
the Gurgáon account; but usually they claim a loftier origin. In
Hoshiarpur tho story is that Sri Krishn Chandra's parents needed a
barber to perform his tonsure, but could not find one, so the child,
seeing their dilemma, made a ball of his own flesh and gave it life as
the first of the Gola Náís. In Amritsar legend has it that at Sri
Krishpa's wedding his barber of the Bapbheru kháp had been sent on
some business to Kajli Ban and could not get back in time. The
Brahman then said that the marriage rites could not be performed
without a barber's presence so Krishna rubbed his hands on bis body
and made a doll of the dirt upon it. Into this doll he put life and gavo
it the name of Melú or Gola.
Although the Gola and Banbheru sub-castes in Hissár cannot
intermarry,* they may smoke together. But in Sirmúr they cannot
now do so, though until 50 years ago they could smoke together, and
may still eat and drink together.
In Nábha the Gola Náis eschew the use of clothes dyed with
kasumbha.
Caste administration.
South of the Sutlej the Náis appear to have a well-established sys.
tem of caste government. Disputes are never taken into court, but are
decided by panchayats under chaudhris. Thus in Gurgaon the Náls of
each group are said to have a chaudhri of their own in each pargana,
and the chief of these chaudhris who is called king, lives at Delhi.
Reference is made to bim if the local chaudhris are unable to decide a
dispute or not in accord among themselves. Heavy expense is involved
in calling him in to decide a case and he is reluctant to attend meet-
ings for trivial causes. There are chaudhris at Palwal, Hodal, Sohna,
Firozpur, Pangwan, Sakras, Nuh and Rewári. They get fees at marri.
ages and from litigants. At a pancháyat, which is attended by all the
leading Náís of a pargana, the chaudhri is seated above everybody
else and after the matter in hand has been investigated his decision has
to be accepted. Similarly the 'king' presides over a meeting of
chaudhris.
North of Delhi the organization is even more elaborate. Under
the king' at Delhi are groups of chaudhris each controliing a chnuntra
which comprises several tappas. Thus Panipat and Sonepat are chaun.
* In Gurgaon it is said that these two kháps used to intermarry till quite recently, but
a Gola abducted a Banbheru's wife and thus started a feud between them.



it ho ducheris in partea de acero
148
The Náis' dependents.
trag with 12 tappas and 360 villages in each. Kalágat has 9 tappas
with 360 villages, and so on.*
The chaudhri has a chobdár or deputy in each village. The head of
each chauntra looks after the Náís of the villages and tappas attached
to it to see if they are obeying the behests of religion. If he finds
anybody violating these laws -he informs all the chaudhris of the
chauntra. If the accused person has any objection to their decision he
can call upon them to reconsider the case, but if he does so be has to
bear all the cost of their food, etc., himself. Chaudhris invited to a
káj get Rs. 2, but at a marriage they get Re. 1 only. The Barpál ac-
count is that every district was divided into tahsils (sic) in the times
of the ancient kings. Each tahsil was again divided into tarpas which
were called parganas, and each tappa included 10 or 12 villages called
thappis. Every thappi was under a tappadár who was under the con-
trol of the chaudhri of tahsil. The chaudhris used to decide cases in
consultation with the tappadárs. Their decisions are not now treated
with much respect, but cases which cannot be instituted in the regular
courts are still adjudicated upon by them. In times past there was
great unity among the Náís. No dispute was ever taken to the courts
for decision, but all were decided by the caste. Its unity has been
much impaired of recent years.
Relations with other castes.
The Náís do not serve the low castes, such as the Chubțás and
Chamárs.
The Náis also rejoin in Sázsis of their own and these client genea-
logists profess to divide themselves into the same khápe as their barber
patrons.
In Gurgaon the Bárís, who are not found in the District, are said to
be the barbers of the Naís. They are found in Bharatpur in the
United Provinces, where they fulfil all the Nái's functions at Nái wed-
dings, receiving dues from them. The Banbheru will not eat at their
hands.
In one of the tahsils of Gurgaon the Bárís' functions are perform.
ed by ihe Balabar, or by a tribe even lower than the Balahar, called the
Bargi. Like the Bárís these two castes make pattals. The Balabars,
like the Báris, are said to have their own chaudhris.
* As these tappas and chauntras are probably very ancient the rest of them are given
here :-
Name of Chauntra,
Number of Villages and Tappas
attached.
Rohtak
84
Maham ..
Goháná
62
...
Jaif
72
8
Khiwan ...
Hánsi ....
84
Hissár ...
150
Toshóm ....
112
Safidon ...
12
These are all Banbheru chauntras. The Golas have a chauntra of 50 villages in Dadri.



Náí cults.
149
The Balahar gots are :-
Báwalna.
Indauria.
Kakarni.
Dabla.
Khariri.
Mahur.
Gondla
Kharkte.
Nadania.
Pharband, etc,
The Bargis make dona and card cotton.
Hospitality to any stranger is incumbent on the Náís.
The cult of Sáin Bhagat.
The cults of the Náís are in essentials much like those of the other
artisan castes. In Hissár the Hindu Náis both of the Banbheru and
Gola sub-castes worship Sáin Bhagat, who has a great temple at
Bhawáni. Originally a Banbheru, Sáin used to wait daily on the ruler
of the state,* but one day he was busy in entertaining faqirs and could
not go to the palace, so Bhagwán assumed his formt and attended to the
king, whose leprosy was cured by his touch. Since then Sáin has
been the bhagat or saint of the barbers. One of the faqirs, his guests,
further bade him ask for anything he desired, so Sáin begged that a
refectory might be opened among his caste-fellows iu his name, whence
the proverb : Sáin bhagat ki hári, Bhúki rahe na aghárí.
Another temple of Sáin Bhagat is said to exist at Lahore. It
contains his tomb and pilgrimages are made to it in Jeth.
Sáin also has a dera at Partábpura in the Phillaur tahsil of Jullundur, I
where the Diwali is the day specially set apart to him. Once, it is
said, boys in play put some bricks in a field and asked what they
were. It is the dera, caine the reply, and in answer to their question
whose dera ? came the response, 'Bábá Sáin Bhagat's. The villagers
removed the bricks, but the Bhagat constrained the offenders to
construct his derá on the very spot where the boys had placed the
* Of Bandhugaſh near Benares, according to the Jind account, which adds that Sáin was
a devotes of Vishnu.
† As the verse says :- Sáin Bhagat ke sanse mete, áp bhaye Har Nái, 'Har became himself
a Náí to allay Sáin Bhagat's anxieties.'
And at Partábgarh in Ludhiána, according to the Nábha account, which says that once
a number of boys of different castes were playing with flags which bore their ancestral
deities' emblems, one that of the goddess, another that of the Gurú, while the Náí boy's
flag bore the image of Sáin Bhagat. In the evening all the boys wert to their homes, but
the Nái boy found himself rooted to the spot where he had to spend the whole night.. Next
morning the villagers assembled and the lad declaring he was Sáin Bhagat's incarnation
bade them tuild him a shrine on the spot. From his descendants its pujáris are chosen to
this day. They only marry among themselves (?). Another account places Partábpur
near Nur Mahal in Jullundur and says that a grand fair is held there on the Bhái Dúj day.
The máris of this temple are barbers. It contains an image of Sáin Bhagat as well as a
Granth (the religious book of the Sikhs). Sáin Bhagat is worshipped both by Hindus and
Muhammadans. Many tales are told of this shrine. Once some boys were playing in a
field and placed some bricks in it. Their playmates asked who they were and were
told the dera of Sáin Bhagat.' Some villagers removed the bricks, but the saintly Bábá
came upon them and forced them to erect bis dera on that very spot. He is specially
worshipped on the Diwali. Food is daily distributed at his shrine by the mahant.
who is elected by the Náís, must remain celibate and gets Rs. 10 a month out of the
income of the dera. Sometimes a woman will vow that if she has sons, who live to
grow up, she will dedicate one to the dera. The first-born is usually offered and he has the
first claim on the Mabantship. Such a boy is at present the successor designate of the
mahant. The office is not hereditary and apparently it is elective, in spite of the claims
of a dedicated boy, for no Gola can be appointed and the candidate must be of good temper
and character and polite manners.



150
Ná - Nak.
bricks. The mahant, who must not be a Gola, is elected, and must
remain celibate, Women sometimes vow to dedicate their sons to
the dera, and a boy so dedicated has the first claim on the office of
mahant,
In Jínd two sons are ascribed to Sáin Bhagat. These were Bháná,
forebear of the Banbheru, and Gokal, progenitor of the Gola,
Nái, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
NAỊCo, Neco, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Sbábpur, Multán and
Baháwalpur. Their septs are :-
Dandra.
Malhni.
Náwal.
Muráni.
Tarapa.
Budháni.
Ladbráni.
Hajáni.
Thú Naich of Baháwalpur were converted to Islám by Sayyid Jalál,
at the same time as their hereditary foes the Bobar, but as they con.
tipued their inter-tribal warfare the Sayyid arranged that they should
intermarry. The Bohars obeyed, but when it came to their turn to
give a daughter to the Bohars they not only refused to do so but killed
their Bohar son-in-law.
Náir, lit. a leader, chief. A title assumed by leading men among the
Aberis or Herís, Thoris and Banjáras.
Crooke states that in the United Provinces the tribe is “ said to
consist of cultivators, traders and prostitutes," and also that “ Náik
is a term for some Banjáras." In Rohtak they are said to be a branch
of Hindu Dhánaks who come from Jaipur. They are also represented,
though quite incorrectly, as au agricultural tribe' of Rajputs,
but Mr. P. J. Fagan says they may be taken to be Aheris ; tbat
they state that they were originally Rajputs and have the same
gots as Rájputs ; and that they generally act as chaukidárs in villages.
Those returned from Ferozepur in 1891 were labourers on the Sirbird
Canal. The Náiks cannot be said to form anywhere a separate caste.
They have, however, in Loháru a got, called Bhagela, which is ap-
parently not returned as an Aberi section and regarding which tradition
says that Papúji Ráthor was a Rájá who had two trusted Bhagela
Rájputs as his advisers, Daman and Chanda by name. They once ate
a buffalo's flesh by accident and so Papúji outcasted them. They thus
became Náiks and eat buffalo's flesh. Other Náik gots are Bhatti and
Chauhan. Náiks worship Daman and Chanda as well as Papúji and
rank them above the gods of the Hindu pantheon. Jodeed some of
them appear to regard Papúji as one of their ancestors, though he is
considered of higher rank than Damán or Chanda. All three were killed
in battle. They are worshipped at the Dasahra, when málida (porridge)
is distributed among the brotherhood. Days of worship also fall in the
dark half of a month. The Náiks have Brahmans from their own
caste,' and employ them in religious rites; but sometimes & son-in-law
is called in to perform them, as he can be employed to do the duties of
a Brahman or a barber. In the absence of a son-in-law members of a
family shave one another. They also worship a sword and a gun.
Naiks burn their dead and throw the ashes into the Ganges.



Nain-Naipál.
151
Their chief occupation is military service. They are not landowners
though they cultivate land and work as day labourers on farm. They
are not artizans, but many are shikáris, with the gun. All their women,
married or not, do agricultural work.
NAIN, (1) a tribe of Játs, who are chiefly found in the detached portions
of Patiala, but have also spread into Hissar and Delhi. They claim
Tunwar Rajput origin and so came probably from the south-east.
They are said to pay especial reverence to Bairágís, and bave a sati
at Kalwan where they dig earth in the Diwali. The Nain are also
found in Multán as a Ját (agricultural) clan. (2) An Aráín clan (agri-
cultural) found in Montgomery.
Naipál,* Nepál.-A clan called after Naipal, son of Bhúni, of the great
Bhatti tribe, who are found on the Sutlej above Ferozepur. They
came from Sirsa in the reign of Muhammad Shah, and once held the
river valley as far down as that town, but were driven higher up
by the Dogars, and in their turn expelled the Gújars. About
150 years ago the Naipáls occupied the Makhu ilaqa, then probably
a complete waste. It is said to have been named Mecca by à fagír,
one Muhamman, who had been there, but its name was corrupted into
Makbu. Originally subjects of the Mughal empire, the Naipals
became independent until Jassa Singh, the Ahlúwália chief of Kapur-
thala, took possession of their territory, established a thána at Makhu and
created the ilága of that name. In Kapúrthala their settlement only
dates from 1837. Mr. Brandreth said of them :-" They resemble very
much in their habits the Dogars and Gújars, and are probably greater
thieves than either. They appear almost independent under the
Ahlúwália rulers, and to have paid a small rent in kind only when
the kárdár was strong enough to conspel them to it, which was
not often the case. They have lost more of their Hindu origin than
either the Dogars or Gújars, and in their marriage connections they
follow the Mohammadan law, near blood relations being permitted
to enter into the marriage compact."
The Naipál in Ferozepur take wives from Muhainmadan Játs,
practise karewa, and are said to have the institution of the got kunála,
whereby a bride is admitted into the husband's tribe, a rite which
is very rare, if not uvique among Muhammadans. Their tenures
resembled those of the Dogars. Prior to Sikh rule they were mainly
pastoral, but under that rule took to cultivation. Like the Dogars
the land of a village was seldom divided, but was held in common.
Unlike the Dogars however few Naipáls are without proprietary rights
in the lands they cultivate, almost every member of the tribe holding
land in ownership, and not cultivating it under a few tribal chiefs as
tepants, like the Dogars.t.
NAJAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
NAJÁRí, a Sayyid clan (agriculturaly found in Amritsar.
* The full name is said to be “Rájput Patti Naipál" in Ferozepur. The Panjabi Dicty.
described them as 'a tribe of Játs,'- but they are on the borderland betweon Ját and Rájput.
# Brandreth, Forozepur Setto Rep., 1859, $ 200...



152
Najjár-Nának-panthi.
NAJJÁR, Pers, a carpenter, a translation of Tarkhán, etc.
NAJÚMí, fem, -aș, an astrologer. Panjabi Dicty. p. 794.
Nakhí, Nakkár, fem. -IŅ, an inhabitant of the south-west part of the Labore
District, Singh, a Sikh of that tract : Panjábi Dicty., p. 794.
Sometimes called, quite erroneously, Nagaria,
NALOKá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Nauda-gáz, a felt-worker : see Teli.
NÁMDEO-PANTHI.--A bhagat of fame, said to have been one of the dieciples
of Rámánand, was Bábá Námdeo, the chhimba or cotton-carder. He
is said to have been born in Márwár in Samvat 1500 (A.D. 1443),
and to have flourished in the days of Sikandar Lodi (1488-1512).
According to one account he was a Maráthí, and was born at Pandharpur
in the Deccan, He is said to have been persecuted by the Musalmãos,
who tried to persuade him to repeat the words “ Allah, Alláh," instead
of his favourite “ Rám, Rám," but by a variety of astonishiog mira-
cles he escaped from their hands. After a considerable amount of
travelling to and fro, he at last settled in the village of Ghumán, in
the Batala tahsil of the Gurdaspur District, where he died. A shrine,
known as the “ Darbár," was erected in his honour in Ghumán, and on
thə Sankrant day of every Mágh a crowded fair is held there in
his honour.* His followers can scarcely be said to constitute a sect.
They are almost entirely, if not entirely, Chbímbas or Dhobís by caste.
Their founder appears to have resisted stoutly the pretensions of
Muhammadaaism, and was looked on as a follower of Rámchandar, but
his Hinduism was by no means of the ordinary type. He taught
emphatically the unity of God and the uselessness of ceremonial ; and
his doctrines would appear to have approached fairly closely to those of
Nának and the earlier Sikhs; and several of his poems are incorporated
in the Sikh Adi-Granth. At any rate the followers of Bábá Námdeo are
very largely Sikhs by religion, and they are said, whether Hindus or
Sikhs, to hold the Granth in reverence and to follow many Sikh customs.
They have no distinctive worship of their own. The Hindu Námdeo-
panthís are found mainly in Jullunrur, Gurdaspur and Bissár, and
the Sikhs mainly in Gurdaspur. The saint's name is pronounced,
and often spelt, Námde ; and his followers call themselves Sikh Námde
Náma bansí, Bábá Nám ke Sewak, and the like.
NÁMDHÁRI, a synonym for Kúku, said to be used in Siálkot.
Namtas, an agrioultural clan found in Shahpur.
NANAD, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
NÁNAK-PANTHI.-The Sikh sect founded by Nának, a Khatri of Tal.
wandi, in Lahore. Nának,' wrote Mr. Maclagan in 1892, was born
iu 1469 A. D. and died in 1538 or 1539, and of his life and miracles
many wonderful stories are told. There is nothing in his doctrine
* At Ghuman, the whole body of Chhímbas descended from Nám deo call themselves
Báwás and are priests of the shrine, which is a fine domed building. Similar dome con.
structions, erected in honour of Námdeo's leading disciples, exist at Dhariwal and Sukho
wál, near Ghumán.



nak and is full of the same
The Nának panthis.
153
to distinguish it in any marked way from that of the other saints, who
taught the higher forms of Hinduism in Northern India. The unity of
God, the absence of any real distinction between Hindus and Musalmáns,
the uselessness of ceremonial, the vanity of earthly wishes, even the
equality of castes, are topics common to Nának and the Bhagats; and
the Adi-Granth, or sacred book, compiled by Nának, is full of quotations
from elder or contenu porary teachers, who taught essentially the same
doctrine as Nának himself. Nor, in spite of the legends relating to him,
does he appear to have had any very remarkable following during his
lifetime. And yet the persons now returning themselves as his
special adherents very largely outnumber the followers of any of the
Bhagats or reformers of the same period. The particular success of
Nának's teaching, as compared with that of the other reforming preache
ers, had its foundation in a variety of circumsta nces, of which not
the least important were the character of his successors and the nature
of the people who listened to him. Most of the other Bhagats were
men of the south-east, teachers from Benares, Rájpútána, or Delhi,
Nának alone had his origin in the Punjab Proper, removed equally from
the centre of the empire ard of Hinduism, and found his following
among castes who possessed such sterling qualities as the Punjabi
Khatris and Játs. But if Nának had had no successors, or successors
of no moment, his following would doubtless have remained a trifling
one; and it must not be supposed that the large number of Nának.
paotbis shown in our tables would have been so returned if Sikhism had
not a subsequent political history.
The Nának-panthis of the 16th and 17th centuries wero a sect much
as the Kabír-panthís and the Dádú-panthis are sects-a sect with cer-
tain wide opinions differing from ordinary Hindu orthodoxy and dis-
tinguished from other sects more by the character of its Gurus and the
organisation of their adherents than by any remarkable differences of
doctrine. The Nának.panthís of to-day are known roughly as Sikhs
who are not Singhs, followers of the earlier gurus, who do not think it
necessary to follow the ceremonial and social ubservances inculcated by
Guru Gobind Singh. Their characteristics are, therefore, mainly
negative ; they do not forbid smoking; they do not insist on long hair,
or the other four kakkas; they are not baptized with the pahul; they
do not look on the Brabman as a superfluity, and so forth. The chief
exterpal difference between the Nának-panthi Sikh and the followers
of Guru Gobind Singh is the disposal of the hair; the former, like the
Hindu, shaves all but the scalp-lock (bodi or choti), and hence is often
known as a Múna (shaven) or Bodiwála Sikh, while the Sikh proper
wears long hair. They are also known as Sahjdhári. The only form of
baptism known among the Nának.panthis is the ordinary Hindu practice
of drinking the foot-nectar of the Guru,* and even this is not very
common. It will thus be seen that from one point of view there is very
little difference between a Nának.panthi and an ordinary lax Hindu.
On the other hand, all Sikhs are followers of Nának, and hence in a
Bonse Nának.panthís; and a very large number of the Sikhs of the
as ; they are aperitivity, and select the followers
*This is known as the charan ká pahul-or foot-baptism, as opposed to the kande ká pahul
or sword baptism of the Gobiņdi Sikhs.



Na ng Hindu indeed, is that all cleare, as a rule very muchvers
154
The Nának-panthis in 1891.
Province have at the present Census returned themselves as Nának.
panthis by sect. This may mean nothing more than that the men were
Sikhs, who being Sikhs reverenced Bábá Nának, and having no other
definite sect returned themselves in the sect column as followers of
Nának. Or it may mean that many Mona Sikhs-men who smoke
and cut their hair-have, in spite of the instructions issued to the
supervising agency before the Census, returned themselves as Sikhs by
religion, but modified this by giving their sect as Nának-panthí. The
extreme uncertainty prevalent in the use of the term is well illustrated
by Mr. (now Sir James) Wilson's remarks on the returns of the
Shahpur district. 10Of the Bindus," he writes, “ 12,539, or 20 per
cent., and of the Sikhs 9,016, or 22 per cent., have returned them-
selves as belonging to the Nának-panthi sect, i.e., as followers of
Bábá Nának, tto first Sikh Guru. (With this may be taken the 405
returned as Hindu Sikh.) There is no clear distinction between these
two classes ; nor, indeed, is the distinction between. Nának-panthi
Hindus and orthodox Hindus at all clear. The fact is that the
Aroras and Khatris of this neighbourhood are, as a rule, very lax in
their religious ceremonies and doctrines, and have been very much in-
fluenced by the liberal teachings of Guru Nanak and his followers.
Those who are most under the influence of the Brahmans and most
particular about carrying out the ceremonial observances of the Furáns
call thediselves Vaishnav Hindus. Those who have been most influenc-
ed by the teaching of the Sikh Gurus and of their sacred book, the
Granth, and especially those who have adopted the Sikh religion as
taught by Guru Gobind Singh, call themselves Nának-panthis, or pure
Sikhs. But these latter are few in number. There are few men who
maintain all the outward forms and rules of conduct of the recognized
Sikh religion (Census Report, 1881, $$ 264, 265) and who can be con.
sidered true Sikhs of that type. But many keep the hair unshorn,
abstain from tobacco, do not worship idols or revere Brahmans to any
great extent, and follow the teachings of the Granth. These also call
tbemselves Nának-panthi Sikhs. Others, again, while they revere the
Granth, yet revers Brahmans also, worship idols now and then, do not
abstain from tobacco, and shave their heads. Some of these call them.
selves Nának-panthi Sikhs, and others Nának.panthi Hindus; so that
there is no clear line of distinction between them. Thus Nának-panthi
in this district means little more than a lax Hindu. Sikhism of this
type is said to be spreading at the cost of orthodox Hinduism ; and it is
probable that the spread of education, commerce and knowledge is
tending to loosen the bands of caste, and encourage a laxity of opinion
and of ceremonial observance, such as was taught by the Guru Nádak,"
The term being so uncertain in its application, there is little to be
learnt from the figures which our tables supply as to the respective
strength of the Nának-panthís in various parts of the Province. These
figures do not bear out the view generally held that this sect is especi-
ally prevalent on the frontier; at the same time there is no doubt
that the Hindus on the frontier were, and probably still are, to some
considerable extent, Nának-panthís. There are well-known colonies
of them in Tiráh and its neighbourhood beyond the Kohát border, and
they are found in all the frontier districts. The Arosas of Kohát are,
commonly divided into two classes--the Bhúmi or autochthonies, who



Nának-putra-Nanga.
155
are to chars, or the former are bras keep the They do not
áre inostly Hindus and worshippers at the Jugi shrine at Kobát, and
the Lamochars, or immigrants from the south and west, who are mainly
Nának-ranthis. The former are known as Sewaks, and the latter as
Sikhs. These Nának-panthi Aroras keep their hair uncut, and though
they touch and sell tobacco, will not smoke it. They do not, however, as
a rule, take the pahul or observe the four remaining kakkas of Gobind
Singh's ordinances. They eat the meat of animals whose throats
have been cut after the Muhammadan fashion (kulhá) and not that
of animals whose necks have been cut by the Sikh method of jhatka.
Except that they will go every morning to the dharmsála, or Sikh
place of worship, to listen to recitations from the Adi-Granth, and
that they use the Sikh forms of morning and evening prayers (Japji
and Rahrás), they are in all respects as other Hindus are on the
frontier. It is not improbable that followers of Nának are diminishing
on the frontier as the fanaticism of their Muhammadan neighbours
cools down ; for it is now possible for Hindus to worship idols openly
in the towns, whereas in former days the Hindus of those parts were
obliged for fear of their lives to profess some form of their faith which,
like the doctrines of Nának, dispensed with the worship of idols.
The term Nának-panthi, as well as those of Sikh and Hinda, are
applied in common parlance in a very loose and confused way. The
followers of Nának returned themselves' under various appellations,
such as Nának Stáhi, Nának-dási, Sikh Nának-dási, Sewak Guru
Nának, Nádak-math, Náuak-padri, Bábá-pantbi, etc. Possibly some of
those returned as Adpanthís may really belong to the same sect; the
term implying an adherence to the original' faith.
NÁNAKPUTRA, (1) a synonym for Odási : (2) A descendant of Nának.' This
is the literal meaning of the term. The Nánakputra were employed in
the later Sikh period as escorts of caravans, their sacred character
as descendants of Gurú Nának, ensuring their safety from attack.
NÁNAK-SHÁHi, a class of faqirs, said to be both Hindus and Sarbhangis who
officiate at Chuhſa weddings, when solemnised by the Hindu phera.
These are said to have 12 gaddis or sees in Amritsar.
NANDAL, a Ját tribe found in Karnál: immigrant from Rohtak.
NANDAN, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar, and, as Muham-
madans, in Montgomery.
NANDAP, a cotton-cleaner.
NÁNDLAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
NANDUÁNA, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery;
Nanga or Sarbhangi. A sect or sub-order of the Jodis, founded by two
Rájput disciples of Mast Náth. They wear no clothes except a loin cloth
and waist rope. Two of their sádhús still stand in turn on one leg by
the fire originally lighted by their founders and never since extinguis ed.
They indulge in meat and liquor and admit men of all castes into their
fold, but do not spilt the ears of Dhánaks or Chamárs. They will eat
from any hody's hand, but are celibate. Their head.quarters are at
Bohar in Rohtak and they claim a share in the temporalities of the
Jogi monastery there.
Page 155—
Under Nánsk-sháhi add: See also under Sanwal-sháhi, p. 380 infra.



156
Nanglú-Naqqál.
NANGLÚ, a sept of Rájputs, descended from Chuhá Míán, son of Sangar
Chand, 16th Rája of Kahlúr.
Nánki-, or NĂNGí-KÁ-PANTH.- A sect which in 1865 appears to have attracted
a considerable number of converts, principally in the Districts of
Gurgaon, Rohtak and Hissár. It derived its origin from a womar,
named Nánki, the wife of one Dharm Dás, of Nárnaul, who eloped with
a Brahman named Dedh Ráj. Dedh Ráj and Nánki travelled to Bengal,
where, it is said, they learnt the doctrines now observed by their
followers. They returned to Kanaund about 1850 and commenced
proselytising. The village of Chúgena in Khetri was the head-
quarters of the panth, and there they built a temple containing a metal
image of Neh Kulunk, whose incarnation Dedh Ráj pretended to be.
The Hindu Shastras foretell the advent of Neh Kalunk towards the
close of the world's history, when mankind shall have become exceed-
ingly corrupt, a belief almost identical with that of the Muhammadans
in their expected Imam Mahdi. Dedh Ráj is said to have written
three works explanatory of his doctrines. He appears to have incul.
cated the abolition of caste ; intermarriage irrespective of class or
position in life; and a mure unrestrained intercourse between the
sexes. Converts were initiated by Dedh Káj, who used to give
them a sweetmeat to eat, which was supposed to awaken a religious
frenzy. Afterwards, like the Kúkas, they received a cotton or woollen
rosary. At prayer meetings the Nánki-ká-printh is assembled in a
line, chanted verses moving their bodies to and fro till they worked
themselves into great excitement, when they danced and ranted. Truth
was a virtue strongly inculcated by Dedh Raj and his followers. The
parents of this sect died about 1865 and Bhagarith Dás, a brother of
Dedh Ráj, became its recognized head. The Nánki-ka-panth observed
many of the Hindu festivals; and except in matters of caste, beld do
very new ideas.
Nanwá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
NAQQÁL, a nimic, the Arabic translation of the Hindi Bøánp. The Naqqal
are also called Bashai in Lahore and bare no relation with the real
Mírási, though they will accost any man of good position whom they
chance to meet and refuse to let him go unless he gives them what they
demand. The Naqqal Mírási are found in Ludhiána. With a chamotá
(a piece of leather) in their hands they mimic Juláhas (weavers), etc.,
but they are a separate caste and do not marry with Mírásis. In
Rohtak the Naqqal in former times had no connection with the Mírásis,
but in the time of Rájá Bhoj a Hindú, one Manwa, used to amuse the
Rájá with his jokes and receive rewards in return. At privy councils
he often mimicked even the Rájá's ministers to their faces. As he was
a royal favourite no one could gainsay him and his victims at last
called him a Bhánd (jester). The Rájá, who also called Madwa by
that name, was once coming down from his balcony with him and
bade him make him laugh till he reached the very last step or he would
bo displeased. Manwa tried many jests, but to no purpose. At last
in despair he knocked off the Rájá's turbad and slapped his face saying
that such a gloomy countenance would never smile. At this the Rájá
laughed and pardoned him. His descendants also followed the pro-
fession of jesting. In the time of the Muhammadan kings they were
is found in Ludhi gives them when they



Naqqásh-Nár.
157
forced to embrace Islám, and by degrees they learned to play musical
instruments. As they adopted singing they had to uix with the
Mírásís and learn the art of singing and playing. Since then they are
called Naqqal or Bhánd, but they do not marry with the Mírásis.
In former times the Naqqal in Gurgaon used to keep bulls and horse
stallions, visiting each village in their beat once a month, but they have
abandoned this calling and now only keep the large drum nagára)
which is beaten on receipt of their fees at festivities.
NAQQÁSH, a painter in papier maché. The Naqqásh in the Punjab and
Kashmir have a distinct argot, described as a true dialect.*
NAQSHBANDI, NAQSHBANDIA, a follower of Khwája Pír Muhammad Naqshband
or Khwaja Bahauddin Naqshband. Naqshband means a painter, and
it is said that the Khwája and his father used to paint cloth. The
Naqshbandis are a Súfi order. Khwaja Ahmad Naqshband of this order
is buried at Sirhind in the Pațiála territory. He was called Majaddid.
alf-sáni (a reformer of the second thousand, meaning a reformer a thousand
years after the Prophet). All Afgháns from the trans-Frontier border
have a special reverence for this saint. There are many shrines of this
order throughout India and it comes next is importance to the Qádria
order. The Naqshbandis worship by sitting perfectly silent and motion-
less, with bowed head and eyes fixed on the ground.
Nár, a synonym for Dági or Kolí in Kullú, according to Maclagan. But,
according to the late Mr. Alexander Anderson, the Nár form a
distinct caste, equal in status to the Náth, but not to be confused with
them. Their duties resemble those of an Achárj Brahmap, and they also
cop secrate and porify houses. They also play a prominent part in the
Káhi ká Mela as the following account of that festival shows:-An
expiatory festival called Káhit ká Mela is held in many Kullu villages
generally in Bhádon or Sáwan (or at Shil village in Jeth), at which a
Nár chosen by the deota is reverenced as Mahádeo and his wife as
Síta or Shakti. He first visits arry house whose owner is afraid that
he has been bewitched and generally by the ceremony of pounding
bhang (hemp) and bekar (a kind of thorn) together in front of a deota
with prayers for his destruction (deopane). The man sits inside his
bouse and the Nár outside, and a young he-goat is killed. Chidra is
then performed, the man and the Nár both bolding one of the goat's
shoulders, which the Nár cuts with a knife, uttering prayers to avert
the spells. After this the Nár and his wife go to the temple, and &
cloth is spread on four sticks placed in the ground (kunda) : four
rams are then killed, one at each corner, and then the Nár is given as
å wali or sacrifice to Shakti. - He becomes insensible, is placed in the
kunda, a rupee put in his mouth, 88 is done to a corpse, and he is
covered with cloths. A sheep is sacrificed on his head so that the
bhúts or evil spirits may seize on that instead of the Nár, and then by
the power of Shakti the man comes to life again. It is said that in
former times the Nár often died, e. g., three died at Mashára temple
near Nagar. The Nár and his wife are given numerous presents by
Sitian chosen by bádon or Silwhite of
* Trade Dialect of the Naqgásh, by Capt. (now Sir) R. C. Temple (Bart.), in J, 4. S. B.
1884, p. 1.
† Kähi is said to mean bodily sin : ? fr. Sanskr. Káya, body,



158
Nara-Nárma.
the people present. The idea is that the Mahadeo will save any ono
bewitched whom the Nár visits in this way, and he is honoured
accordingly as a parohit or priest. Before the Nár is called, men of
any caste, however low, take pieces of wood (called lánd, membrum
virile) and throw them into the women's laps with indecent words and
gestures. The popular explanation of this is that the evil spirits will be
frightened at the exhibition, but the one given by a more educated
man is that the ceremony is survival of the old worship of Siva and
Shakti wben there was a promiscuous intermingling of high and low
castes.
The Nárs are said to have been chosen by the deotas from the Dági,
the lowest caste of all, to perform in the Káhi festival. The nárs
(fr. natu,* shameless) are now a little higher than the Dágis, and
Kanets will smoke with them.
NABA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
NARAINí, a worshipper of Narain, one who depends solely on what Providence
sends him day by day. Panjábi Dicty., p. 803.
NARANGKARIA, see Naraogkar and Nakalsaini.
NÁRATH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.::.
NARRAT, a sept of the Bhatti Rajputs, said to be so called from the violent
temper of its founder Jám, 7th in descent from Sumra. Cf. Hattiári.
Nárma, Nárwá, a sept of Rajputs found in Gujrát on the Jhelum river.
The Nárwá and their Mírásis trace their descent to Rájá Karn who
founded Ujjain and extended his dominions to Patna. The tribe is
pamed after Nárú Khán, a contemporary of Akbar and 8th in descent
from Karn. In the disorganization that prevailed at that time the off-
spring of Nárú Khán were scattered all over the country and settled in
different places. Pahár Khan in the seventh generation from Nárú
Khán, who was a hero and a great highwayman, came to Gujrát and
founded two villages, Púrán and Fatehpur. Tradition says that Púrán
was so named because Pahar Khán used to order bis followers to seizo
people by saying Paurán, i. 8., "seize and bring.”
The Nárwas in Gujrát say that they have the following pide sub-
livisions :-
1. Sadryál.
4. Haudál.
7. Jogál.
2. Adryál.
5. Jalálie.
8. Umrál.
3. Sambharyal.
6. Alimyána.
9. Hassanabdálik.
Intermarriages between the sub-divisions are common, but sometimes
families descended from an elder branoh will not give daughters to
descendants of a younger branch though they have no objection to
taking girls from it. They also take wives from Mughals but never
give them in return. Chibhs used to take girls from the Nárwás but
never gave them in return. It is now said that Chibhs.sometimes give
them daughters but the leading Nárwás cannot point to any instance
of this usage.
Fohán, who was a habár Khan tored all over the att
people named Beogos, Parden great higher enth sementery
-
-
This points to some connection with the Nat or prostitute caste of the plains. Diack's
Kutri Dialect of Hindi doos not give natu or Nár,



The Nárwa-Rájputs.
159
After confinement the mother must remain in her room for seven days.
Some iron implement is placed towards her head. On the seventh day
she is brought out with the child, and the Mírási gets on top of the
house and repeats the pedigree of the child's father.
The tonsure ceremony must be performed at the tomb of Pír Haibat,
Kandahari, near Púrán, where a yard of cloth and some cash are offer-
ed. The tonsure must be done within 15 days after birth.
At marriage the ceremonials described sur che Chibhs are observed.
The only difference is that the Nárwás do not make the bride sit on a
basket before the bridegroom when he reaches bis father-in-law's
house.
The Mírásis give the following genealogical tree of the Nárwás :-
Karn.
Thut. ir,
ancestor of
the Thuthyáls who
are found in Ráwal-
pindi, in the
Pothwar, and in
the Khárián tahsil
of Gujrát.
tán,
Sahal.
Sahal. Gh
Ghauman. Rájá suraj, Raman,
Descendants ancestor of
Sudhan.
are said to the Ranyál
be in Hindus. tribe.
Tek Chand.
Lakhpat.
Rám Chand.
Prithmi Rai.
Naru Khán,
ancestor of the Nármá
Rajputs.
main in
Alláh Kuli.
Fayáz Din.
Malik Khan.
Jaisak.
Descendants found in Jammu
territory.
Subhán Kuli. Mihr Kuli,
Descendants found in various
parts of the northern hills.
Changas Khán
Aki Khán,
No issue.
Pather Khán.
Ditta Khán.
Pahari Khán.
No issue.
Fatah Khán. Haudal.
Jalal. Alim Khán. Jawaja. Oya Khán. Humáyun Khán.
Descendants of these five brothers hold Púrán in
Khárián tahsil.
Descendants of these
two brothers hold
Fatehpur in
Khárián tahsil.



160
Narmi-Nárú.
It will be observed that the Nárwá or Nármá claim no connection
with the Nárú Rájputs of Hoshiárpur although the word appears to be
formed in almost the same way as Bájwá (Ját) from Bajju or Bájú
Rajput. Possibly -wa is a patronymic.
NARMI, see under Utmánzai.
Nárú, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Multán.
NÁRÓ. With the exception perhaps of the Manj, the Nárú are the most
widespread of the Hill Rajputs ; but their head-quarters are the
districts of Jullundur and Hoshiárpur. They differ in their accounts
of their own origin. Those of Hoshiarpur, many or most of whom are
still Hindu,* and those of the adjoining northern portions of Jullundur
say that they are Chandrabansi and came from the hills ; while those
of the east of Jullundur about Phillaur, who are all Musalmáns, say
their ancestor was a Raghobansi Rájput who came from Ajudhia, en.
tered the service of Shaháb-ud-dín Ghori, and eventually founded
Phillaur. A third story makes the common ancestor a son of a Rája of
Jaipur or Jodhpur, who was converted in the time of Mahmúd of
Ghazni, and settled at Bajwára in Hoshiarpur. The Nárú held the
Hariána tract on the Jullundur and Hoshiarpur border till the Sikhs
dispossessed them. The original settlement of the Jullundur Nárú was
Mau, a name which, as Mr. Barkley pointed out, suggests an origin
from eastern Hindustán or Central India. Of the Hoshiarpur Nárú
1,279 also returned themselves as Kilchi, 556 as Manhás, and 903 as
Gondal in 1881.
The Nárú of the Púnga, Badálá and Dhút septs say their ancestors
came from Garh Gajni Dhun Peti, in Delhi, and settled in Bajwára in
Akbar's reign : they are Raghobansi.
Another account locates them at Madwára in Hoshiarpur. Thence
Bhán Nathu and Rámán founded Chauthála in Akbar's time, and
thence Dhút and Daulatpor, but they perform the bhadan at Madwára.
At Bujhásan, five kos from Madwára, they fought with the Katoch
who were offended at a Nárú Ráná's obtaining a Katoch princess as
his bride, and she was drowned. The Nárú take daughters from them.
In Kapurthala the Nárú say that Haun Bhatti in Hoshiarpur was their
first seat: thence Bághe Khán founded Bágána and from his brother
Kashmír Khán the present Nárú claim descent.
Confused and conflicting as these various accounts are, that from
Hoshiarpur is totally different from the above. In that District the
Nárús say that their ancestor was a Súrajbansi Rajput of Muttra,
named Nipal Chand, and descended from Rája Rám Chand. He was
converted in the time of Mahmúd of Ghazni and took the name of
Nárú Shah. Nárú Shah settled at Mau in .Jullundur, whence his son,
* Mr. D. G. Barkley said the Nárú of Hoshiárpur were mostly Muhammadans, though
in Gardaspur there were Hindus. The Nárú of Rajwára, though Muhammadan, have
retained the title of Ráná. The Bajwára Ránás claim considerable antiquity and say the
place was founded by a Ráná before the time of Vikramaditya and Sáliváhana. They
say they became Muhammadans in the time of Mahmúd of Ghazni and so retained their
independence till the Lodi and Sur Patháns located Afghán settlers in strongholds round
Bajwára and reduced the Náru Ráná to insignificance : P. N. Q. II, SS 96 and 104.



Narsati-Narwal.
161
Ratan Pál, founded Phillaur. Thence were founded the four Nárú
parganás of Hariána, Bajwára, Shám Chaurasi and Ghorewáha in
Hoshiarpur, and that of Bahrám in Jullundur. The chief men of these
parganas are still called Rái or Rána. The Nárús are all Muhamma-
dans, but keep Brahmans of the Básdeo got.
The Nárú pedigree is thus given :-
Rájá Jasrath
Rájá Rám Chandr.
Rájá Talochar.
Nipal Chand (Naru Khán).
pital, bain charge of it."ya in both sides of a
Mahmúd of Ghazni conquered the country on both sides of the
Sutlej, and placed Talochar in charge of it. After leaving Mau he
made Bajwára his capital, but the attacks made on him by the hill
chiefs compelled him to invoke Mahmúd's aid, and Pathan* troops
were sent him who were cantoined along the foot of the Siwaliks and
are still settled there. Rána Sihra, Nárú Khán's descendant in the fifth
generation, returned to Ajudhia, whence Talochar had come, and re-
conquered his ancient kingdom, over which he appointed a viceroy.
He died on his way back to the Punjab at Sunám. His third descend-
ant, Rána Mal, had five suns-Kilcha, Bhojo, Dhuni, Massa and Jassa,
who divided the territory. Kilcha got the Hariána ilága with 750
villages, including Nandachaur, Bahrám and Bulhowal, with the title
of Tika Bhoju got Bajwára, Shám, Ahrána, Ajram, Baroti and their
dependent villages. Dhuni got the Dhuniát, i. e., Patti, Khanaura,
Muna, Badla, Harta, etc. Nárú Khán's grandson Baripál had already
seized Bhangála, Dasuya, etc., which his descendants still hold.
It is hardly possible that the Rája Jasrath of this story is the Kho-
khar chief of that name mentioned on page 1000 of Vol. I. The story
jo outline is probably true, but the Nárú settlement can hardly be as old
as Mahmúd of Ghazni. Relics of the old Nárú dominion survive in their
chhat or principal village and makán which are villages of secondary
rank. Chauthála is a Nárú makán. It was settled from Bunga (in
Kapurthala), a chhat. The Nárú chhat are Hariáva, with two sub-
sidiary chhat at Ghorewáha and Nandachaur: Bajwára with Shám
Chaurasi : Patti with 8 chhat and 12 makan, including Harta, Dihána,
Khapaura, Mithiána, Phuglána, and Muna Kalán in Hoshiarpur: the
Dhúniát makán are mainly in the same tahsil: Bunga chhat has makáns
at Chauthala, Mirzapur, Jallowál and Pindori Malhian.
NARSATI, the people of Arandu (called Arnáwai by the Pathans) are called
Narsati and speak Gawarlati, or, as it is termed by the Chitralis
Narsatiwar.
Narwal, a Ját tribe or got, found chiefly in tahsil Şangrúr in Jínd. It de-
rives its name fancifully from narwal, lit. beating, because its progeni-
tor used to take such care of the grass growing in waste land that he
* The Patháậs were never heard of till a much later period in the Punjab.



.
:
162
•
Narwán-Násar,
used to beat the dust out of it. The word is also said to mean
ing fields. Also found in Karnál. :
clear
:
NASIREITS are own a tribute their voit kärris Zar was probabled into be
pathán tribe, found of the the tribes. Thomaer in the
YARWÁN, a tribe of Játs found in Jind, Its sidh is Bábá Mannan, whose
samadh is at Bhedpura in Patiala. Virgins are fed at this cenotaph
and milk is offered there on the 5th of the light half of every month.
NÁBar, Násiri, a Pathán tribe, found on the Dera Ismail Khắn border.
The Násars are the least settled of all the tribes. They have no
country of their own. They winter in the Deraját and summer in the
Ghilzai country, paying tribute, Rs. 3,000.Nandrámi, to the Turán Ghil.
zais for the right of grazing in their country. Their wealth consists
mainly in their herds and flocks. T'heir kirris or encampments are
scattered along the skirts of the hills from the Zarwanni Pass in the
Gúmal valley to Kot Tagga below Chándwan. They probably number,
with their women ano children, 20,000. They are divided into a
number of important sections, but the more popular division of the
Násars is into camel folk, ox and ass folk, and sheep folk. Of the
camel folk or ushuâls, the poor 'one come down first. They engage
principally H8 carriers, taking goods to and from Bannú. They brivg
salt from the Kohát mines, Multáni matti from the hills and gram
from Marwat. They are also much employed in cutting and selling
fuel. The well-to do mer come later, and venerally bring merchåndise,
grapes, almor ds and mudiler. The kirris of the chmel-folk are usuully
si'uatred away from the hills, at Saggu Triniman, Paliniála, Potah, and
in the Káhiri iláqa he ox adıi aas folk (ghwayewáls and kharwals)
own only -Xen and donkeys. They are gen-rally engaged in doing
jol.8, carrying earih, bricks, etc., in the towns. They have no kirris of
thir own. They arrive at the end of September, and return about
the beginning of April. The sheep folk (goshfiindwáls) arrive during
October, and return about the end of April. They occupy the country
along the foot of the hills. Some of them encamp at Panniála, but
these generally take their flocks for part of the season into the Bhakkar
Thal. The Násars are for the most part short, sturdy men. On the
whole they are a well behaved tribe, though a little inclined to be
overbearing in their treatment of the villagers in whose neighbourhood
ther encamp. Their cattle not unfrequently trespass on to the cultivat-
ed fields, and attempts on the part of the proprietors to seize and
impound them are sometimes opposed by force. They are a rough
and ready lot, who would probably, but for the advent of British rule,
have treated the Mián Khels and other tribes, who have baen enervat-
ed by long residence in the plains, much as the forefathers of these
latter treated the Súris and the Pabbis, driving them out and appropri.
ating their lands.
According to Ibbetson the Násar claim descent from Hotak, a grand.
son of Ghilzai, but as he pointed out the Hotak say they arə & Baloch
clan and merely dependent on them. The story makes them descend-
ants of a gang of blacksmiths who in the 14th century accompanied
the Mián Khel Patháns on one of their return journeys to Khorásán
and settled there. They speak Pashto. According to Raverty the
Tokhi division of the Ghilzai claim that the Násar were in ancient times
ko, etc., in the generangchhe and sharuan



The Nate.
163
their hamsáyas.* He gives the following as their pedigreet :-
Ghalzoo.
Ibrahim,
Sabák
Tarakki.
Mamai.
Nasir (Nasu).
(Spín) Malizai. (Sur) Nasu Khel. (Tor) Umarzai. Mandai (few, and now
almost unknown).
The descendants of Násir (Nasu) had a feud with another clan of
their own division of Sahaks (sic) and so went over to the Tokhi
division whose hamsáyas they became for a time. But, he adds, the
Násir was probably only an adopted son of Mamái, and their appear.
ance indicates the foreigo descent of their immediate predecessor. He
would regard them as being descended from one of the Turk tribes
located on the western frontiers of the Ghazni kingdom towards the
Afghánistán, by the Turk feudatories under the Samánís and the
Tark Sultáns of Ghazni, like the Kharoļi branch of the Ghilzais and
the Jáji and Túri tribes of Upper Bangash (Kurram).
The Násirs took part with the Ghilzais in the conquest of Persia and
were subsequently incorporated with the Hotaki section of the Ghilzai
which is considered the chief branch of that tribe. The Ghilzai leader
Sedál Khan who opposed Nádir during their expulsion was a Násir.
NAT, fem. NAȚNI, fr. Sanskr. nața, a dancer. The Nat is the typical
gipsy caste of the Punjab. It is possible that there may be properly
some distinction between the Nat and the Bázígar; but the two words
are synonymous in general parlance. Some say that the Bázígar is a
tumbler and the Nat a rope-dancer; others that the Bázígar is &
juggler as well as an acrobat, while the Naç is only the latter, and it
is possible that those who reach the higher ranks of the profession may
call themselves by the Persian name; others again say that among the
Naţs the males only, but among the Bázígars both sexes perform; and
this latter distinction is reported from several Districts. On the whole
* Raverty points out that násir.= assistant or keeper. Cf. Awán.
+ Dames gives the following table :-
Násir.
Spínkai (Spín).
Malizai.
Umar (Umarzais).
Nasir (Násirzais).
i
Jalal. Bar, Azghar. Sálak. Zangi. Yahya. Washai Kamal. Bori. Nismai, Musasai, Shidizai,
(Ashi
Of one
· Of one mother. Khols).
mothers



164
The Nats.
it is perhaps more probable that the Nat is the caste to which both
classes belong, and Bázígar an occupational term. But even Muham-
madian women who dance and posture are called Națnís-or more often
Kabútris.
Th» Naţs are a gipsy tribe of vagrant habits who wander about with
their families, settling for a few days or weeks at a time in the vicinity
of large villages or towns, and constructing temporary shelters of grass.
In addition to practising acrobatic feats and conjuring of a low class,
they make articles of grass, straw, and reeds for sale; and in the
centre of the Punjab are said to act as mimics, like the Bhánd, and as
Mírásis, though this is perhaps doubtful. They often practise surgery
and physic in a small way, and are not free from the suspicion of
sorcery. Some are herbalists, and others musicians, but the drum is
said to be the only instrument they can play. They are said to be
divided into two main classes ; those whose males only perform as ac-
robats, and those whose women, called Kabútri,* perform and prostitute
themselves. About three-quarters of their number return themselves
as Hindus, and most of the rest as Musalmáns. They mostly marry by
phera, and burn the dead; but they are really outcasts, keeping many
dogs with which they hunt and eat the vermin of the jungles. They
are said especially to reverence the goddess Devi, Guru Teg Bahadur,
the Gurú of the Sikh scavengers, and Hanúmán or the monkey god,
the last because of the acrobatic powers of monkeys. They very
generally trace their origin from Márwár; and they are found all over
the Punjab, but not in the Frontier Province, where they are
apparently almost unknown. The large number returned in Baháwalpur
and Montgomery, in the former as Naţs and in the latter as Bázígars,
is very striking. Their different tribes are governed by a Rája and
Káni, or king and queen, like the gipsy tribes of Europe. The Musal-
inán Naţs are said to prostitute their unmarried, but not their married
women; and when a Naţ woman marries, the first child is either given
to the grandmother as compensation for the loss of the mother's gains
as a prostitute, or is redeemed by payment of Rs. 30. But this is per-
haps the custom with the Pernas rather than with the Națs. Another
and more probable account is, that the first wife married is one of the
tribe, and is kept secluded ; after which the Musalmán Naț, who is
usually to be found in the towns, will marry as many womeu as he can
procure by purchase from the vagrant tribes or otherwise, and these
latter he prostitutes.
. The origin of the Nat is obscure. According to a tradition current
in Amritsar they were originally Brahmans of Márwár whose duty it
was to supply fuel for funeral pyres. Once upon a time they had a
wedding in their own caste and as they had to attend it they took 8
supply of fuel to their patrons, lest one of them should die before it
was convenient to the Națs to attend to their duties. Their patrons
naturally regarded this as an ill-omened precaution and dispensed with
their priestly services. So the Națs went to a faqir for aid and he bad
a monkey Hanúmán who taught them feats of dexterity. Chamga,
Bero and Banúr are said to be Nat clans, but one account divides
them into occupational groups, such as snake-charmers, jugglers and
dancers, monkey exhibitors, herbalists, and so on.
* Lit. 'tumbler,' fr, kabutar, pigeon.



one variant, o els he was es phe bade bring his
treacheryant, a faqiraja's capital. A tenge her deathome out to
Nat-Natt.
165
A curious legend connects the Națs with the foundation of the modern
State of Sirmúr. Its Rájá had promised a Națni half his kingdom if she
crossed and recrossed the Giri river on a tight rope. She had crossed
and was nearly back again when the Rája had the rope cut to evade
his promise. The Giri in order to avenge her death in its waters rose
and swept away the Rájá’s capital. After her drowning, according to
one variant, à faqir came to Náhan and cried out against the Rájá's
treachery. For this he was expelled the palace and he found a refuge
with a poor Brahmani whom he bade bring him food from elsewhere
than Nában. At mid-night he called for milk and her cow though not
in milk yielded it. The fagír then bade her fiy as the town was doomed,
so she fled across the Giri with her children. No sooner had she
reached the opposite bank than the town was overwhelmed, Rájá and
all. After this the bands of the Natni's kindred went to Jaisalmir and
obtained from him & promise of one of his sons as a successor to the
treacherons Rájá who had perished. The ruler of Jaisalmír had seven
ránis all then pregnant and of these he gave one to the Națs. They
took her to Náhan and in solitude near the Sirmúr tank she gave birth
to a lion, four monsters and a son. With difficulty she was induced to
disclose what had occurred and the Națs exercised the lion and the
monsters, named Sotan, Chatán, Baithán and Kharán, Bbásu and drove
them into the dhák jungles near by. The son became the first Rájá of
the modern State.
Naf, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Nára, originally a title or possibly a degree, of the Jogi order. The word
means lord' or 'master.'
In the Simla hills the Náths have become a caste and are described
as followers of Guru Gorakh Náth and Bharthari. They have become
a caste in the Simla hills. They wear large rings in their ears, but rank
below the Kanphata Náths or regular Jogis. They accept articles given
at a kiria karm for the dead Brahmans. Kanets and Sunárs do not
drink water brought by a Náth or smoke with him. They are in the
Simla hills what the Mabábrahman or Achárj is in the lower hills.
The Náths of the higher hills in the Himalayan area, where the
worship of Siva is prevalent, correspond very closely with the Jogis of
the plains, though they make little pretence to an ascetic character and
live chieily by growing vegetables ; but they also perform certain semi-
sacerdotal functions, taking the place of the Achárj of the plains in the
funeral ceremonies of the Kanets, and receiving like him the clothes
of the deceased. They also consecrate new houses, and purify them
when they have been defiled. They now form a true caste, and are
not recruited from without. One or more in almost every Náth house-
hold has his ears pierced in honour of Siva, and is called a Kanphata
Náth. They occupy much the same social position as the Jogi-Ráwal
of the plains. But they are regarded as so unclean or uncanny that
even a Hesi will not eat from their hands.
NATHOKA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Natrí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Natt, a tribe of Játs, descended from Natt, son of Jograh, and like the Bang
and Wahála claiming to be sprung from the Solar Rájputs of Ajudhia,
They are found in Siálkot.



166
Nauk
Naturi'.
Nauk, a sept of Brahmans, parohits of the Gadhioks in Jhelum.
Naul, a mungoose (Potobári). Cf. Nol and Neola.
Nauríá, Nauhríá, a class of merchants trading with the Punjab from down-
country. Panjabi Dicty., p. 808.
Naushání.A Muhammadan order (regalar, but mystical in its tendencies)
and an offshoot of the Qádiris (q.v.), deriving its origin from Sayyid
Abdul Wahab, eldest son of Abdul Qadir Jíláni. Its real founder,
however, was Háji Pír Muhammad Sachiár, whose tomb is at Naushahra
on the banks of the Chenab in Gujrát, and who was called Nausbáh or
Nausho,* ' bridegroom,' because he became a fagér while still a bride-
groom. Another story has it that Haji Muhammad Naushábí
Ganjbaksh, who was a year old when his father Alá-ud-dín, a cattle
dealer, died, was brought up in a family of potters and followed Sakhi
Sarwar; he left four disciples, namely (1) Shah Rahmán Pír, who is
buried in Gujranwala, (2) Pír Muhammad Sachiár, (3) Khwaja Khujail,
who is buried at Kábul, and (4) Shah Fatah, who is buried in the Ganji
Bár. However this may be, the followors of this sect differ from the
Qadirís both in allowing the use of instrumental music at divine service
and in the extreme religious excitement permitted on such occasions,
during which they shake their heads to and fro (hál khelna) in a most
alarming manner, and are even said to be held up by the back. Their
principal shrine in Sialkot is that of Gulu Shah, near the village of
Korake, in the Pasrúr tahsil, where there is a large annual fair. They
have a branch, the Pákrahmánís, q. v.
NAWADE, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Nawár, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Nawaríí, fem. -AN, see Nauría.
Nárak, see Náik, fem. á, án.
NEB, a mace-bearer : also the name of a caste which is sometimes said to be
originally KALÁL. Indeed one account divides the latter caste into
three groups: (1) the Soakha, who are by origin Bánias; (2) the Ablú-
wália, Neb or Karnwal, which claims Khatri descent; and (3) the
KAKKEZAI. The Neb again have three sections or groups, Pál, Segand
and Rakhi which are said to be hypergamous. They avoid four gots in
marriage, employ Brahmans at religious as well as on ceremonious
occasions and marry at an early age, from 10 to 15. They are said to
take water from the hands of a Jhinwar or a Tarkhan, but not from
those of a Chhímba or a barber.
NECHARI, the phonetic spelling of Naturi, the modern broad school founded
by the late Sir Syad Ahmad Khán of Aligarh. A few free-thinking
Hindus have also adopted the term for themselves. The term,' writes
Mr. Maclagan,' is of course applicable to either religion, but in its special
sepse it represents a Musalman school of thought, led by Sir Syad
Ahmad Khan and Syad Amir Ali Khán: the object is to adapt the
religion of Muhammad to the spirit of the age, to clear away the glosses
C
* The conception of the devotee as a bride or bridegroom is common to othor religions as
well as to certain Islámic sects. We may compare the Dulha Doo of Hinduism.



Nehra-Niáik.
167
of commentators, to get at the essential teaching of the Prophet, and to
show how this teaching has in it nothing inconsistent with the highest
non-religious philanthropy of to-day. Slavery, according to this
school, is abhorrent to the spirit and teaching of Islám : polygamy is
indirectly forbidden by the Qurán ; Mohammadans have never prosely-
tised sword in hand ; and the future life indicated by the Prophet is as
noble and pure in aspiration as any prefigured in any religion. This
school has returned to the fountain-head of Islám, just as the Aryas
among the Hindus have returned to that of Hinduism, and in either
case the original scriptures are taxed to produce results compatible with
the latest achievements of science and social philosophy. The efforts
of the Nature School are, however, if not of a higher order than those
of the Aryas, at any rate of a kind more intelligible to European
thought and very much in accordance with the similar tendencies
among the broader schools of thought in modern European Christianity.
The leaders of the school are men of great intellectual power and
thoroughly conversant with the points of view adopted by European
critics of their religion; and'the foundation of the Aligarh College in
the North-West Provinces has done a great deal to establish their
authority. The Necharís advocate most social reforms, and in politics
they are generally ranged on the side of the constituted authority. They
belong, however, to a movement which has had its rise outside the
Punjab; and as they are not an organized society, there is nothing to
show how far they are represented in this province. The importance
of the movement is not to be measured by figures, and even if we had
a full return of professed followers of Sir Syad Ahmad Khán, we should
still be far from judging the strength of the principles he represents.'
NIERA, a Ját tribe found in the Bawal nizámat of Jínd. They claim to be
an offshoot of the Chhatrias who left Gadgajní when it was the scene
of conflict. They worship the devi and Bandeo, whose shrine is about
a mile from Bawal. Bandoo was the son of a Brahman and they do not
smoke.
NEKOKÁRA, Kukáre, lit. 'doers of good.' The Nekokára like the Jhandír are
a sacred clan. They are chiefly found in the Jhang district and claim
to be Háshami Quraish, who came from Bahawalpur some 480 years ago.
They hold land in Gujranwala aisc, but are not a very important tribe.
In Gujránwala many of them are faqirs, and they generally bear &
semi-religious character. But in Multán they are ranked as a Ját clan
(agricultural).
NEN (? Nain), an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
NEOLA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán. The word appears to
mean mungoose, neul or neula. Panjábi Dicty., p. 812. Cf. Nol.
NEQRU, NERU, a name applied to Kanets claiming descent from the Máwis,
and also to the children of Brahmans or Rajputs by Kanet women,
In the former sense it appears to be synonymous with Kbund, the
term applied to Kanets of the first class, tracing descent from the
Máwis, in Basbahr. -
Nepál (? NAIPAL), a Řájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
NER, a Kumboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
NÁIK, one versed in the Niải şhâstra. Panjábi Dicty., p. 813.



168
Niária-Niázi.
Niáríá, -YÁ, fom. -áraŅ, a washer of gold and silver filings, a refiner of
precious metals (fr. niára, 'separate'). He is called Sodha in the
south of the Deraját and Soni in Ambála and Sirmúr.
In the west of the Punjab he seems to be known as Shodar or Sodar;
and as one of the Sunár clans is called Sodari, it may be that the
Niária is generally or always a Sunár by caste. The Niária however is,
unlike the Sunár, generally a Musalmán ; though, curiously enough, he
is returned as Hindu only in Peshawar.
Niázs, Niázal, a Pathán tribe, descended from Niazai, one of the three sons
of Ibráhím, surnamed Lodái. They are thus Lodi Patháns and akin to
the Dotannis, Prangis, Súrs, etc. Originally chiefly Powindas or
nomads, they were expelled from the district of Shilgaſ, south of
Ghazni, by the Andar and occupied the eastern skirts or Dámán of the
great Sulaimáu range, holding the territory subsequently known as
Tak or Tánk. There they continued to lead a pomad life, and
gradually spread further north-east towards the Indus, occupying the
thal or steppe now held by the Marwat, who drove them to the north.
west. They are still fairly cumerous in Kobát and are found in small
numbers in Dera Imail Khán.
The Niázais, now in the eyes of their own people, the most abject of
the Afgháns, once played a great part in the history of porthern India.
One of the most trusted officers of Sher Shah, Súr, king of Delhi, was
Haiba Khán, Niázai, and his brothers, Isá Khán and Saf?d Khan also
held high office. The former was hájib or royal chamberlain. At the
defeat of Humáyán at Chaunsa in 1540 Haibat Khán greatly dis-
tinguished himself and Isá Khán carried on the pursuit of the routed
Mughals to the banks of the Indus. Haibat Khan and Isá Khán, with
other amérs, were left by Sher Shah in charge of the Punjab, and
eventually Haibat Khán beoame sole governor of the province, with
instructions to recover Multán from the Baloch invaders. For his
services in this charge Haibat Khán received the title of Azam Humá.
yún, Masnad-i-Alá," the most august, the occupant of the exalted seat."
Islám Shah, the successor of Sher Shah, however, distrusted the power
of his Afgháu nobles and though Haibat Khán remained loyal for a time
he was compelled to revolt when Sa'id Khan fled to him for refuge.
With 40,000 horsemen, Niázais, Yusufzais and Mandarns, of whom no
less than 12,000 were Niázais, Haibat Khán marched to join the
disaffected nobles who had found an asylom in Kumaon, and encount-
ered the royal army near Ambála. Here the defection of Khwás Khán,
one of his allies, led to his complete defeat, and he led to Dhaukot
beyond the Indus, hotly pursued by a large force under the Khwája
Wais, the Sarwáni Afghán. "The Niázaís found an asylum in the Gakhar
country north of Rawalpindi, but eventually were compelled to seek
refuge in Kashmír. Headed off on that road they turned towards
Rajauri, only to fall victims to a Kashmiri force which destroyed the
tribe, all the four brothers* being killed. Before this event, which
occurred in or about 1550, Haibat Khan had all but exterminated the
SUMBALS, a branch of his own tribe. Another branch is the Isá
KHEL.
* The fourth brother was Shahbám.



Nihálke-Nikalsaini.
169
In appearance the Niázais of Kohát resemble the Bangash rather
than the Khatak, but in the matter of shaving the head some take a
middle course, only shaping the front.
NIHÁLBE, a Kharral clap (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
NIBANO, 'free from care,' a title of the Akáli Sikhs.
Nihání, a fem. Nái or barber, q. v.
NIJAR, a clan of Játs with whom certain SUNÁR sections claim & common
origin.
NIJHAB, a clan of Jaţs found in Kapúrthala and elsewhere.
NIJJAR, see Najjár.
NIKALSAINI, OR NARANGKÁRIA, a sect of faqirs whose origin is thus
described*:
"After the battle of Gajrát and the pursuit of the enemy by Sir Walter
Gilbert, the Kbálsa (Sikh) army surrendered at Ráwalpindi, and giving
up their arms and receiving a gratuity of a rupee each, they were
permitted to disperse to their homes. A great panic prevailed among
the Sikhs of the District : very many cut off their kes or long bair, and
were in great dread of being forcibly converted to Christianity. Some
months after three men were seen going about the cantonments of
Ráwalpindi, dressed up in the cast-of clothes and hats of Europeans,
and with sbaven heads and faces. The eldest gave himself out to be
the mahant or chief of a sect, and the others to be his chelas or
disciples. The mahant played upon a two-stringed instrument known as
the dutíra, and he and his chelas sang songs in praise of the English
in general, and of John Nicholson in particular, whom they declared to
be their guru. It should be borne in mind that during the Sikh rule it
was by no means uncommon for fagirs to receive, through the good
offices of the kárdárs or district officers, assigoments of land-revenue
from the central goveroment at Lahore, for the maintenance of religious
or quasi-religious institutions. John Nicholson was well known to the
people of Ráwalpindi. He had waged in the neighbourhood a guerrilla
warfare during the hot weather of 1848 with Sirdár Chatar Singh and
other rebels, and when by the proclamation of the Governor General,
dated the 29th March 1849, the Punjab was annexed, John Nicholson
was appointed the first Deputy Commissioner of Ráwalpindi. There-
fore these men, by calling themselves Nikalsaini faqirs, were under the
idea that the Deputy Commissioner of the District would feel flattered
at being associated with a new sect, whose guru he was acknowledged
to be, and would no doubt get them a handsome jágír or free
grant with which to establish a dharmsála or monastery all to
themselves! But when they found that they were uncared for by
Nicholson (I have been told that he had them flogged once), and
got nothing for their pains, their enthusiasm cooled down, and after
two or three years they were beard of no more. I often saw them
and once or twice spoke to them in 1850, and, as far as I can
remember, they had not a particle of an idea concerning any of the
* By J. G. Delmerick in P. N Q., II, $ 953,



170
Nikki Ravi-Nimcha.
doctrines of Christianity. They affirmed that the Bible was true, like-
wise the Quran and the Granth! Indeed, I fancy that they were the
originators of the Narangkárias, NIRANKÁRI, a sect of schismatic Sikhs,
which sprang up in the Ráwalpindi District about that time, and which
20 years ago, promised to bring every Hindu in the Sind Ságar Doáb
into 118 fold; but afterwards, for some unkoown reason, a coneiderable
number of the converts slid back into orthodoxy, and I believe there are
few Narangkárias in the Ráwalpindi District row. The monument to
General Nicholson is at the head of the Márgala Pass, about 16 miles
from Ráwalpindi, on the Peshawar road. I never heard of any Nikal.
saini faqirs there :* indeed, I never heard of the existence of any
since 1852 or 1853, certainly never since the Mutiny."
NIKKI RÁvi, tho 'little Rávi' tribes, as opposed to the 'great Rávi'tribos.
The latter are pastoral rather than agricultural, and include the
Kharrals, Káthias, and many of the great tribes of Muhammadan Játs.
They look down upon the little Rávi' tribes who live within their
limits, and who are agricultural rather than pastoral, consisting of
A ráíņs, Kambohs, and similar tribes common in the eastern Panjab.
The great Rávi' tribes are notorious for their propec sity to cattle-
stealing, and among them a young man is not allowed to wear a turban
or to marry a wife till he shows byistealing a buffalo that he is able
to support her, while a headman who has not a number of dependents
ready to steal for or with him is popularly koown as "an orphan."
Nílání, Nilárí, fem, -AN, -Ní. Níráli, Nilgar, a dyer, see Lílári.
NÍMA-NANDI, one of the four main orders of the Bairágiš. See also under
Nimbarki.
NÍMBARKI. A sect or sub-order of the Bairagis.
The orthodox accountt of Nímbarká or Nimbaditya, who founded the
sect, is that he was so named because he once stopped the motion of the
sun on the top of a nimba tree. He also promulgated an abstruse
theory of the Dualistic Aduality of the soul. But the popular idor of
the Nímbarkis is that they reverence the nim tree because their deota
is incarnate in it. The Nimbarki would thus seem to be the same as the
Níma-nandi or Níma-Khark-Swami, mentioned by Mr. Maclagan,t and
it may further be noted that Ním Náth is given as one of the twelve
disciples of Gorakh Náth. The facts may point to the existence of a
sub-sect, worshippers of the nim tree, upon which the philosophical
doctrine of Nímbarka' was grafted.
NÍMCHA, 'half-breed,' a term applied to the Pashto-speaking people on the
l-ft bank of the Indus and in the lateral valleys to the eastward (includ.
ing the people of the Pakhli and Agror valleys in British territory) by
the pure-blooded Afgháns of Yúsufzai who refure all matrimonial or
other alliances with them. The Nímchas in their turn refuse to 2880-
ciate with the tribus in their north. Probably descended from Tathan
settlers from Swát and aborigines the Nimchas are easily distinguished
suntt of Nimburle he once stoppen ated an abstrusoe
* The sect was supposed to have connected itself with the monument.
† Psyrhological Tenets of the Paishnavas, J. A. 8. B., 1884, p. 108.
Punjab Census Report, 1892, pp. 123 and 114 (footnote).



Ningmapa-Nirankári.
171
from pure Pathans by their acoent: Biddulph, Tribes of the Hindoo
Koosh, p 7.
NINGMAPA, old one. The sister order of the Buddhist Drukpa (q. v.).
Their head is Gsungsprül (pron. Sungtrül) of Lotraglalung Gonpa be.
tween Khams and Lhassa. They hold the monastery of Pin in Spiti.
Certain of the buzhen families-descended from Ningmapa monks-
became manepas or wizards. Their witchcraft consists chiefly in
breaking stones on their stomachs, swallowing knives, and other more or
less common conjuring tricks. They travel widels, but even in Spiti
their powers are not greatly believed in and they do not pretend to the
black magic of the Bonpas or Black Caps. They accept the rgiút or
Book of Mystical Doctrines, called in Sanskrit Tantra, which Tsong-
khapa eliminated from the Kagiúr: see Gelukpa.
NIRÁLí, an indigo dyer (Multáni); see Lílári.
NIRANKÁRí, a Sikh sect. The term nirankár,* "incorporeal” is old in
Sikhism, dating back to Bábá Nának himself, who was originally called
Nának Nirankári. The sect, however, is a modern one, having been
founded by one Bhái Diál Dás, a Khatri of Peshawar, who established
it at Rawalpindi about 1845. On his death in 1870 bis son Bhái Bhara
or Darbára Singh succeeded him, and then Bhái Rattá, another son.
The Nirankárís worship one invisible God as a spirit who is a hearer
of prayer, avoiding idols, and making no offerings to them, to Brahmans
or to the dead. They abstain from all flesh and liquor and reverence
truth, Pilgrimages are regarded as useless, and neither Brahmans nor
cows are to be reverenced. The first day of each month is to be kept
holy by attendance at the temple, reading the Granth, repentance for
sins, and almsgiving. The Adi-Granth of Bábá Nának is their sacred
book though they also respect the later Gurús and their writings. Wed.
dings are celebrated according to the Sikh rites, by a granthi and not by a
Brahman : the bride sits unveiled in public and the pair circumambulate
the Adi-Granth, instead of fre. Widows may remarry. At funerals
also they dispense with Brahmans, and instead of mourning the event
is regarded rather as an occasion for rejoicing. The sect has an amrit-
sar of its own on the Lei stream near the park in Rawalpindi, and
their dead are burnt there. At their darbir or meeting place in
Ráwalpindi town is a shrine of the. Adi-Granth, where Bhai Dial's
slippers are kept and revered. The sect recruits all classes.t
But caste and social status are not affected by conversion. The
Nirankárís also inculcate belief in the transmigration of souls; rever-
ence and honour towards parents. Lying, cheating, and using false
weights are peculiarly heinous crimes. Smoking is forbidden, but
Nirankárís may sell or deal in tobacco, They are said to have curious
rites on the birth of children, described as a little reminiscent of Jewish
ceremonies. The use of wine and flesh is probibited; indeed a Niran.
kári, except in the course of duty as a soldier, may not deprive &
sentient being of life. The Nirankári doctrines are exoteric and they
gladly explain them to inquirers. Polygamy is prohibited.
* Sanskr. nirákar, “ formless."
† Maclagan, $ 95,



172
Nirmalá-Naul.
NIRMALÁ.*_The Nirmala Sádhús, or "pure saints," are a Sikh order.
They originated, like the Akálís, in the time of Gurú Govind Singh,
but the history of their foundation is obscure. According to one story
a water-carrier was seized by the Guru's soldiers for supplying their ene
mies with water during a battle, but the Gurú declared him stainless
(nirmalá). This account, however, undoubtedly arose out of a cou.
fusion between this order and the Sewápanthis, and the more probable
version is that Gurú Govind Singh sent three disciples to Benares to
learn Sanskrit and desigpated them, on their return, the “ stainless," as
being the only learned men among the Sikhs. At first they took the pahul.
and wore white raiment, but they have adhered to the study of the
orthodox Hindu scriptures and thereby lost touch with Sikhism. They
now wear the ordinary saffron robes of the Indian faqir, possibly to
facilitate begging, which they profess to avoid as they claim to subsist
on offerings voluntarily made. They retain the kes. The Nirmalá
form a well-disciplined and highly respected organisation. Each mo-
nastery is under à gurú, while a council or committee periodically visits
their societies throughont the Province. Almost always celihate they
bear & far higher reputation for morality than most of the other rehgi.
ous orders in the Punjab. Their principa! Akhára is at Hardwár, but
they also have foundations at Amritsar and elsewhere.
N18BÁNIA, the second of the Sikh misls or confederacies. It was recruited
frorn Khatris and Rangrethas or converted sweepers and the name is
said to mean standard bearer' from nishon, a standard.
Nisowána, a Ját clan agricultural) found in Shahpur, wh-re they held a few
villages, and also in Jhang wh re they are described as pure Ját tribe
thongh in the Census of 190 i they returned theinselves as Rajputs.
They hold the northern corner of Chiniot tahsil in Jhang between the
Lális, Gilctars and the Shahpur border. They are sometimes spoken of
as if they had a dialect of their own, called Nissowáui or Niswáni and are
a fine body of men, fearless and hold, with a great reputation for thieving,
but formerly described as a prosperous, thriving clan, rich in flocks and
berds with ecarcely any debts.
Nızámí, see Chishti.
Nosána, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
Noar, a tribe of Muhammadans found in Montgomery.
NOHILKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
No, Naul, a Ját tribe, found in Jhang tahsil and, like the Bhanga, early
settlers in that tract. They occupied the lowlands of the Chenab round
Jbang before the Siáls. Swarthier than the generality of the people
and speaking a more uncouth tongue, their traditions carry them back
to Dhan, a Rájá of Bikáner who settled in Jhang whde the country was
under a Brahman dypaaty. Naul was the son of Dhan. The Sials
were for some time, after their arrival in the country, subject to the
Naul and paid tribute through them Always a turbulent and lawless
race, they used to be great cattle-owners preferring cattle-breeding to
* Bittorly opposed by the Akális.-Maclagan 108, Trumpp's Die Religionder Sikhs,



Nonári-Nún.
178
of thing® forfeited if he in Spiti. ni the four noble
family of Ladakh (ladik with the jos op of his own rank_tor life, but
agriculture and cattle-lifting to either. * Nols have also settled in the
Chenab Colony.
Nonári, (1) a tribe of Muhammadans found in Montgomery; (2) a Ját clan
(agricultural) found in Multán: see also under Núnári.
Nono, the title given to any male member of the four noble families of Kuiling,
Mane, Pin and Gyungul in Spiti. The title is retained for life, but
would he forfeited if its bearer married ont of his own rank-an unheard.
of thing. The nonos rank with the jos of Láhul and with the royal
family of Ladakh (ladákhski (r)yalrigs). The head of the Kuiling
family is recognised by Government as the Nono of Spiti, but he is never
known in his own territory by any other title than that of Gyalpo or king.
Princesses of the blood are called shemo, and the queen is apparently
addressed as shemá.
The marriage laws are most rigid. The king and the princes must
marry in their own rank and, if a bride is not available in Spiti, must
ride to Láhul or Ladakh to procure one. The present Nono's (Gyal.
po's) great-grandmother, for instance, was a Ladákhỉ princess. By a
special dispensation the daughter of a nono may espouse a commoner
and yet retain her rank as shemo, but it is open to doubt whether, as
stated in the article on Chahzang, a morganatic union of this kind
would confer the courtesy title of jo on the commoner husband.
NORDAHÁ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
NÓHÁRNI, LÚHÁrns, Núháni, Nogáni, etc.—A branch of the Lodi Pathans,
descended from Núhárnai or Nuh (Noah). He had six sons, Mamá,
Maya, Tataar, Shaikh or Patakh and Húd (Eber) by one wife, and by
another, MARWAT. The descendants of Shaikh and Húd appear to have
mostly migrated into Hindustan and the remnant has been absorbed
by the other Núhánis. Mamá had three sons: (1) Yásín or Yúnas,
progenitor of the Daulat Khel Pawindas and their kinsmen of Tánk,
with their several branches, and of the Hassan Khel : (2) Haidar or
Khizr, founder of the Lako, Búrá, Ibrahim and Kod Khels; and (3)
Ya’kúb, founder of the Khel named after him.
Maya, progenitor of the Maya Khel Pawindas of Draband had two
sons, Loç and Son or Yasín, who founded two tribes of those names
with 6 and 7 sub-sections respectively.
Tataur had two sons, Aso and Músá, founders of the Khels named
after them.
NÚN, (1) a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán, where they are prominent
in the north of Shujábad tahsil. Also said to be a branch of the
Bhattis and to have migrated from some place called Thánewáhaa
near Delhi.' Converted to Islám by the Makhdúin of Uoh Jabániáu
or Sayyid Jalál they retain the title of Ráoa. The genealogy ropre.
sents Nún, Uthera, Kunjar and Kuliar as sons of Rájwaddan and opo-
nyms of as many tribes : another makes Jai and Utera brothers of Núp
and Jhakkar son of Jai: see also under Channar. The Nún are also
found in Montgomery; (2), « Rájput clan (agricultural) found in
Shabpur; (3) a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
* The Panjábi Dicty. gives Nolo, 8.f. (Ric) as a tribo which answers this description.
Clearly Nol is meant. Mae word appears to be identical with neola and naul. & mongooso,
The latter form is found in Potohári.
two songs respectivelrounded two 1. Draband ,



174
Núr.Nyingmá.
Núe, a tribe of Rajputs, now apparently extinct. They are said to have
migrated into the Punjab from the Deccan in early times and to have
founded Kálánaur,* in the Gurdaspur District, Káhna, a Núr, is also
said to have founded Kahnúwán in that district, but Sher Shah Súr
settled a body of Afgháns in the place and they held it under him.
Akbar gave Salho, a Harchand Rajput, charge of that part of the
country with a grant of 360 villages. The Harchands dispossessed the
Afgháns of Kahnúwán and still hold it, the Nárs apparevtly having
disappeared.
NÚR-BAKHSAÍ, a sect found in Báltistan and described by Biddulph (Tribes
of the Hindoo Koosh, pp. 123-5). Vigne called them Kelucchah.
NÚREKE, NORKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
NUTKÁNI (NODHAKÁNI), are a Baloch tribe peculiar to Dera Gházi Khán,
which holds a compact territory stretching eastward to the Indus and
between the Northern Khosa and the Kasráni. The tribe once enjoyed
considerable influence and importance, holding rights of superior
ownership over the whole of The Sanghar country. But it no longer
possesses a political organization, having been crushed out of tribal
existence in the early days of Ranjit Singh's rule. But the event is so
recent that it still retaios much of its tribal coherence and of the cha-
racteristics of its race.
Nyáriá, see Niária.
NYEK 4, see Cháhzang.
NYINGMÁ (? NYIMAPA), see Dukpa.
* Kálánaur however is more probably a corruption of Kálá-nagar and doubtless derives
its name from Káleshwar (Shiva) whose temple stands on the old citadel.



175
Od uswn as a shame PTOR SE the nature. The coads
Obháí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
OpH, Up, Op or BeldÁR.-Beldár is properly the name of an occupation
merely; it is derived from bel, a mattock, and it denotes all whose calling
it is to work with that instrument. But though the common coolie of
the Province will often turn his hand to digging, the Od is the profesa
sional navvy of the Punjab; and the word Beldár is seldom applied, at
least as a tribal name, to the members of any other caste, though it
seems in more common use in the west than in the east, the Od of the
west being generally known as Beldár.* In some places, e.g. in Gujrát.
the Oď or Beldar styles himself a Shaikh, if he is a Muhammadan.
The Od are a wandering tribe whose proper howe appears to be
Western Hindustan and Rájputána ; at least the Ods of the Punjab
usually hail from those parts. They are vagrants, wandering about
with their families in search of employment on earthwork. They will
not as a rule take petty jobs, but prefer small contracts on roads.
canals, railways, and the like, or will build a bouse of adobe, and dig á
tank, or even a well. They settle down in temporary reed huts on
the edge of the work; the men dig, the women carry the earth to the
donkeys which they always have with them, and the children drive
tbe donkeys to the spoil bank. In the Salt Range tract they also
quarry and carry stone; and in parts of the United Provinces they are
said to be wandering pedlars. They eat anything and everything.
and though not unfrequently Musalmans, especially in the west, are
always outcast. They have a speech of their own called Odki or in
Multán Odakki, which is very probably nothing more than the ordinary
dialect of their place of origin. They wear woollen cloths, or at least
one woollen garment. They claim descent from one Bhagírat who
vowed never to drink twice out of the same well, and so dug a fresh
one every day till one day be dug down and down and never came up
again. It is in mourning for him that they wear wool, and in imita-
tion of him they bury their dead even when Hindus, though they
marry by the Hindu ceremony. Till the re-appearance of Bhagirat
they will, they say, remain outcasts. They are said to claim Rajput or
Kshatriya origin and to come from Márwár. They worship Ráma and
Sivat like the Pushkarna Brahmans who are sometimes said to be them.
selves Ods by descent. The Od are, for a vagrant tribe, singularly free
from all imputatiou of crime. They are distributed pretty generally
throughout the Province, but are most numerous in Lahore and along
the lower Indus and Chenab, and least numerous in the bills and sub-
montane districts. But a writer who gives a good account of their
methods as 'professional navvies' says they are principally found in the
Jumpa tracts. I
* Mr. Obristie, however, was assured that there are large communities of professional
Beldárs who are not Ods. They are generally Musalmán in the Punjab proper and Hindu
in the eastern districts; they are not outcasts, have fixed habitations, and work as carriers
with their animals when earthwork is not forthcoming. It may be that the Musalmans
returned in our Cansus tables belong to this class ; as Od and Baldár have been confused.
+ Wilson's Indiún Caste, II, pp. 114, 139, 169.
P.N. Q. UI, $ 634.



176
Odhana-Orakzai.
At an Od wedding in Maltán branches of a jandi tree are cut, and
the bridegroom is made to touch the bride's knee with his own on the
spot. An ornament called chandın hár is tied round the pair's knees,
which are then touched with a club. No Brahman is called in on this
occasion, but Brahmans are said to be employed on all ceremonial
and religious occasions, the parohit getting a rupee at a wedding.
Ods in Multán wear the choţi, but no janeo. They are said to abstain
from eating an animal called giráh (kirú, snake), but may eat everything
else lawful to Hindus.
In the lower part of Outer Saraj, in Kulla, on the north bank of the
Sutlej the Ods appear to form a separate caste. They are a menial
class, higher than the Lohárs, with whom they will smoke and drink
water, but will not intermarry, and higher than the Barebís with whom
they will smoke, but will not driuk water; and lower than the Thávís
who have no social intercourse with them. The occupation of the Ods,
however, is the same as the Chávís, namely, house-building. They are
not apparently found in the adjoining parts of the Simla Hill States,
south of the Sutlej, or elsewhere in Kullu.
Ophána, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Ousí (? WAISI), a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
OGAR, see under Jogi.
OJAL., a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán; also in Kapurthala.
OJH, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Ojoá, a Hindu school-master. (Multani). Panjábi Dicty., p. 832.
OKHAL.-A Ját tribe found in Jind. They offer a piece of coarse sugar, bheli,
to their jatherá at marriage.
OLAKH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. Svo Aulakh.
Olak, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
OMARA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
ORAKZAI, W ROKZAI.-- A Pathán tribe. Like the accoants of many another
Pathán tribes, an account of the Orakzai is rather curious reading, the
bulk of it being often devoted to showing that the tribe is in the main
not Patháp at all, but something else. The Orakzai have several foreign
sections, 6.g. the Sheikhan (No. 10 in the appendix below), and several
aboriginal or "Tíráhi' sections. If indeed we exclude all the sections
whose Pathán origin is doubtful, the pure Pathán element is very
small.
The origin of the Orakzai.—The Orakzai is & tribe of obscure
origin, and it is doubtful if they are true Afgháns, though they are
said to belong to the Karlanrai race, being descended from Kadi, the
younger son of Karran, as are the Dilazák. The tribe itself olaims
descent from a Persian prince, Sikandar Sbáh who was exiled, (wrukzai,
lost or exiled) from his father's kingdom, and took refuge with the
Muhamm dan king of Kohát by whom he was employed to subdue the
Tíráhis af Tíráh, who were then Hindus or non-Afgháns, ruled by
various rájás, and divided into two branches-Dilazák and Parbalı.
Sikandar Shah conquered the Tíráhis, and on the death of the Kohát



Orakzai groups.
177
king claimed that region as his son-in-law, but was opposed by Banga,
a Dum or musician of the Persian court who had been despatched in
search of the prince, but had passed himself off at Kohát as his brother,
and obtained the second daughter of the king in marriage. Failing to
conquer Banga, Sikandar Shah returned to Tíráh and married a Tíráhi
woman as his second wife. After his death his descendants waged
constant wars with the Bangash or descendants of Banga, until the
plain country was allotted to the latter and the hills to the Orakzai.
Bellew assigns a common origin to the Orakzai, Afrídi, Bangash, etc.,
and says the Bangash were ousted from Zurmat in Wazíristán by the
Ghiljis (sic) and driven into Kurram, and thence into Míránzai aud
Kohát, whence they expelled the Ghabris, Safis and Mangaris--three
non-Afghán tribes, of whom the first may be the modern Ghebas of
'ahsil Pindi Gheb in Ráwalpindi. The Orakzai include, however, several
tribes such as the Shaikhán, of Gardez in Wazíristán, the Mishtias
and Ali Khels, both originally Yúsafzai, and the Malla Khels, of Ghilzai
descent, who are not true Orakzai. These tribes, however, are not
Shias, for that sect is practically confined to the Muhammad Khels, who
included the tribes shown in the margin,
Bar Muhammad Khels.
Mani Khel.
though the Tazi, Bar And and Lar
Sipáyas.
And-three hamsiya or vassal sections
Abdul Aziz Khel, of the Kamál Khel of the Tíráh Sturi, or Afzal Khels in
section.
Tiráh, are also Shias. The Muhammad
Khels are descendants of Bázíd according to the tribal pedigree, and
it is interesting to trace their connection with the shrines of the
South-West Punjab, for the Sináras have two shrines, one at Usi, a
ziárat of Pír Kainál Shah, a grandson of Makhdúm Jahánian of Uch in
Jhang, and the other a shrine of Pír Saidán Shah, a cousin of
Makbdúm Isá of Bilot in Dera Ismail Khán.
And throrah Sturi, or The Muhammaa
1.-ORGANISATION.
Sectarian groups.-The most important principle would appear to be
the religious or sectarian one. The Shia Muhammad Khel appear to be
quite distinct from the other Orakzais, who are thus divided into two
main groups, Shia and Sunni by religion. But the religious principle
operates also to split up the main groups into religious sections, a good
example of this being given by the Isá Khel (No. 4 below), who now
form a distinct section. Lastly within each section we find still sinaller
sections or sub-sections with names which show that they have
been formed owing to sectarian différences, at least this is the only way
in which we can account for names like Naqshband Kor in No. 6,
Bábá Nmási in No. 8, Khwaja Khel in No. 12, and some others. Thus
it seems clear that religious or sectariau influences are constantly at
work to split up the natural divisions of the tribe.
Territorial groups.--There are only a few of these among the
Orakzai, viz. the Sweri and Pitáo divisions of the Alisherzai, No. 14,
and the Báráh and Tíráh Sturi Khels, of No. 19. Bizoti (No. 18) is
also apparently a territorial section.
Ethnic groups. These again are not very numerous. There is a ..
Hindki Khel in No. 2, and Tiráhi Khels in Nos, 10 and 20.



178
Orakzai customs.
It seems probable however that these are not the only principles on
which groups are formed. The Lashkarzai clan and the Sipaya sec-
tion (No. 22) may point to a by-gone feudal or military organisation
in certain clans. Still the fact remains that by far the most important
factor in the organisation of the Orakzai is the religious or sectarian
one.
II.-SOCIAL CUSTOMS.
Houses and villages.-Dwellings are usually constructed of stone in
mud with courses of timber at intervals. In Tíráh the houses are, as
a rule, of 2 or 3 storeys, each storey being not more than 10) ft. in
height. Cattle are kept in the lower storey : while the second is the
living room. The uppermost is a tower for defence, though sometimes
it is only an open verandah on the roof, where the women sit and spin.
In many cases there is only one room in each storey, in which case all
the inmat-s sleep together In the houses of the richer classes there are
2 or even 3 rooms on the ground floor and second storey. Almost
every house has large corn-bins of baked earth, usually wholly or partly
under ground. Orakzai villages generally consist of houses built
together, whereas, in Maidin, the Afrídis reside in scattered hamlets,
each man living a part with his immediate relations and dependents.
Afridi houses are, as a rule, much better built than those of the Orak-
zai, The Orakzai villages have the houses facing inwards, and these
are entered from outside by small openings.
Food.--Two meals are taken, one in the morning, the other at even.
ing. The staple food is maize bread, eaten with dál, vegetables or
butter-milk, Wheaten bread is a luxury. Rice is used on all cere-
monial occasions, when it is eaten mixed with mung. Meat is only
eaten occasionally, e.g. at the Id, or to do honour to a guest. The
Orakzais are not so particular about their food as the Afrídis.
Dress.—The Orakzai garb is that of the ordinary Pathans among
the men There is not much difference between Sunnis and Shias
or between Orakzais and Afrídis, but the Shia Orak zais generally wear
clothes of a dark khaki colour, while the Afrídi Shias wear white.
Snoes are almost unknown. Sandals made of dwarf-palm are worn.
An Orakzai woman wears a head sheet, a khat and trousers. The khat,
presented to her with her trousseau, is used only on ceremonial occasions.
It is a long garment like a night gown extending from the neck to the
legs, and is made of country cloth, dyed dark blue. It is tight to the
waist and loose below. Red chintz of country manufacture striped with
yellow, or white, is stitched over the back and sleeves of the khat, the
front and skirt being covered with an embroidery of red and white
was-work (chikan). Younger women also stitch silver coins on the
front of this garment. The trousers are made of coarse country cloth,
dyed black with red spots. This garment is loose to the knees, below
which a piece of striped red cloth (pacha), six feet long, with an em.
broidered edge of red, yellow or green silk, is sewn. These pachas are
turned over and over three or four times to form a kind of tight gaiters,
and this performance often occupies a quarter of an hour. The pachas
last longer than the upper portion of the trousers, which have to be
renewed much oftener,



Orakzai dress.
179
Among the Daulatzais the women do not use the pachas, and wear
instead loose trousers with a string or button to fasten them over the
ankles. The better classes wear a khat and trousers of long cloth, or
márkin, in summer, but use coarse cloth for these garments in winter.
The head sheet of the younger women consists of a piece of country
cloth, dyed black or dark blue, 2} yards long by 14 yards broad, with
a broad border of yellow and red silk on the narrow side. Elderly
women wear a striped black and white head sheet with a narrow border
of red silk. In the case of poorer women fine red cotton thread is sub-
stituted for silk in the borders. Unmarried Orakzai girls wear white
trousers without gaiters (pachas). There is not much difference in
dress between Afridi and Orakzai women. The former use more
wax embroidery than the latter, and the Afrídi women's trousers
are dark red in colour without spots. They also fnsten these garments
lower down in the waist, and wear longer pachas than the Orakzai
women. The use of henna, or antimony, is not common among Orakzai
wom-n, except with the Ali Khels und Alisherzais. Generally speaking,
Orakzais are much more slovenly in their dress than Afrídis. An
Afrídi can be distinguished from an Orakzai at a glance by his dress,
except perhaps the Aka Khel Afrídis, whose mode of dress closely
approximates to that of the Orakzais.
Jewellery.-Orakzai women do not wear jewellery, and their orna-
ments do not differ much from those worn by Pathán women in British
erritory. The following are the priucipal articles :-
Large ear.ringa, deodi, silver.
Necklet, ogi, silver.
Small ear-rings, skanri, silver.
Frontlet, chingakh, silver.
Small nose-ring, chárgul, silver.
Bracelet, wakhi, silver.
Small nose-ring, nata, gold.
Chain, garewan, silver.
Large nose-ring, pizwan, gold.
Necklace, nimboli, gold.
Neck ornament, haiqal, silver.
Rings, gutti, silver.
A few of these ornaments require special notice. The deodi is worn
in the lower lobe of the ear, and the skanri in the upper portion.
The pizwan and náta are only worn by the richer classes. The nata is
worn on the right side and chárgul on the left side of the nose, aud
the pizwan below, in the nostril ridge. The haiqal consist of three
flat, roughly decorated, silver ornaments, about an inch and a
half square, which are strung together and worn over the breast.
The chingakh is an ornament of fretted silver worn over the forehead by
women of means. The garewán which is a distinctive Orakzai orna-
ment is an arrangement of silver coins and chains with tasselled ends,
and looks very effective, especially on a gala dress of Wax-embroidered
cloth. The nimboli consists of a gold cylinder, which is strong wich
beads, and worn round the neck. The haiqal is presented to a girl by
her fiancé on betrothal, and at the time of her marriage the ogi is given
to her by her parents. The garewán and wakhi are generally supplied
by the husband just before marriage. The girl usually acquires the
skanri and chárgul in her parents' house in childhood. The other
ornaments are supplied by her parents or husband, as their means may
admit. All the ornaments are worn by the bride at the wedding, and
generally for a period of five months after the ceremony. Then they
are laid aside, and only used on occasions of rejoicing, except the wakhi,
ogi, and skanri, which are always worn.



180
Orakzai observances.
Birth,* naming, and circumcision.- A pregnant woman among the
poorer classes does not desist from her menial duties of bringing grass
and wood from the hills until the last month of her pregnancy, when she
generally remains at home. The period of confinement is very short,
and child-birth is as a rule easy among these tribes. After delivery
the lying-in woman remains in bed for only three days, but she refrains
from doing any work for a week. After the lapse of forty days she
resumes her usual occupations. No notice is taken of the birth of a
female child, but the advent of a boy is made the occasion of rejoicing.
Drums are beaten by Dúms, who receive a present of Rs. 5 (Kábuli)
and gur and raisins, to the value of from Rs. 2 to 8, are distributed
among the friends, who come to congratulate the family. Among the
Sanni clans the custom of dram-heating is dying out owing to the re-
strictions of the Mulláhs, who taboo this form of amusement, but it still
floorishes among the Shia sections. Female children are named by
their mothers, or grandmothers, without any formal ceremony. Names
are given 10-male children from 10 to 20 days after the birth in con-
sultation with mulláhs, Sayyids or faqirs. Boys are circumcised between
the ages of two and four. This ceremony is celebrated by a feast of
rice and ghi in places where rice is abundant, as among the Daulatzais.
In other localities, as among the Ali Khels, gur and raisins are distri-
buted among the friends, relations and neighbours of the parents.
Betrothal and marriage. As a rule among the Orakzais, children
are not betrothed until they attain puberty, and marriage quickly
follows betrothal. Marriages are usually determined by consider-
ations of family convenience. It is a common practice for a inan
to marry his first cousin, in which case an exchange of betrothals
is generally effected. The rasmána for marriages between relations is
fixed at from Rs. 100 to Rs. 240 (Kábuli). Besides this, food, clothes
and ornaments have to be supplied. The quantity of food to be sup-
plied, which consists of ghi, rice, gur, maize, wheat, mung, salt and
henna, varies according to the number of guests to be fed. Clothes to
the value of Rs. 10 and ornaments worth Rs. 60 are also furnished.
Wben a girl is not married to one of her kinsmen, the following
arrangements are made preliminary to the betrothal. Some women of
the boy's family first visit the house of the girl's relations, and return
after satisfying themselves as to the suitability of the match. Over-
tures are tben inade by the boy's family, and, if these are favourably
received, the marriage settlements are made. Some elders from the
boy's village, accompanied by a few women of his family, next proceed
to the girl's house on a night appointed for the purpose, and the termos
of the marriage settlement ara announced. This deputation, which
is feasted at the expense of the boy's parents with gur or, in the case
of well-to-do people, with goat's meat, generally succeeds in procuring
some reduction of the rasmana demanded for the girl, which varies
from Rs. 200 to 700 (Kábuli) according to the position of the parties
and the attractions of the girl, Rs. 300 being the usual amount. In
addition to this, food, clothes and ornaments have to be supplied, the
* "The spokes in the sun's disk are compared to brands; and it used to be the custom
with the Afghán tribes to brand the forehead of a child born in an unfortunate or unlucky
hour, to drive misfortune away." (Raverty's Poetry of the Afgháns, p. 316.) No sur.
vivals of such customs or ideas are reported.



Orakzai marriages.
181
cost of which also depends on the means of the parties. The amount
of rasmána agreed upon is either paid at once, or in moieties, half at
the betrotbal, and half at the time of the marriage. The betrothal is
then considered complete. The marriage, which may, or may not,
immediately follow the betrothal, is not usually celebrated until the
full amount of rasmána bas been paid up. Boys are generally married
at 18, and girls at 15 years of age. On the day before the date fixed
for the marriage it is obligatory for the families of both bride and
bridegroom to feast the residents of the village or qnarter in which
they reside.
There is nothing special to nute in the marriage ceremony, which is
the same as that which prevails among Muhammadaus in British terri-
tory. As, however, ponies are scarce among the Orakzais, the bride-
groom generally travels on foot to the bride's bouse and not on horse-
back, as elsewhere. The bridal procession moves along to the music of
pipes and drums, and, at intervals, guns are discharged. At the wed-
dings of well-to-do persons dancing boys, lakhtai, are also employed.
Among some Sunni tribes, such as the Mámozais, in which the influence
of the mulláhe is preponderant, the wedding is performed without
dancing or music. On reaching the bride's house the marriage party,
as well as the people of the bride's village, are feasted on food previ.
ously supplied by the bridegroom. If the bridegroom's village is not
at too great a distance, the bride is generally taken home by him on
the day of the wedding after the ceremony. At weddings the wo-
men of the village assemble in the bride's house and sing epithala.
mia, called sandra.8.
Orakzais have no objection to marrying Afghán women, but of
course would not marry one of their daughters to a non-Afghán. In
the same way it is said that they object to giving daughters in mar-
riage to Afrídis, though they take Afrídi women as wives without besi-
tation. The lower Orakzais such as the Mishtis, Mulla Khels, and
Sheikháns are generally reluctant to give daughters to the Upper
Orakzais, such as the Mámozais and Alisberzais, though the reverse is
often the case. The reason assigued for this is that the former are
supposed to be better off.
In the case of the remarriage of widows, the rasmána varies accord-
ing to circumstances, but it is as a rule less than that demanded for &
virgin, and no ornamente, food or clothes (kharch khorák), are sup-
plied. In the case of a widow the rasmána becomes the perquisite of
her late husband's heirs, who often marry ber themselves. An Orakzai
usually marries one wife at a time, though, if he is rich enough, he
may indulge in a plurality of help-meets. A man with a childless wife
often takes another wife to bear hiin sons.
The sale of wives is uncommon among the Orakzais, and is regarded
as a disgrace. If the husband cannot put up with his wife on account
of her misconduct, incompatibility of temper, etc., ho sells her to some
one living as far off as poesible. Again, a widow is sometimes sold
when her husband's heirs are unable to come to an amicable arrange-
ment about the disposal of her hand,



182
Orakzai divorce, etc.
Adultery and divorce.--Adultery is not common and is avoided as
being a fruitful source of feuds. If the guilty pair are caught flagrante
delicto, both are generally killed. In other cases a feud arises, the in-
jured husband is entitled to take two lives, and the woman becomes
the property of the seducer, or his family. If the family of the injured
husband is too weak to prosecute the feud, the wife is divorced and
sold in some distant place, and compensation is exacted from the
seducer.
A settlement can only be effected on the following terms. If the
seducer is not killed, he has to pay the value of two lives at the rate of
Rs. 360 (Kábuli) each, plus Rs. 75 as sharmána. In the case of the
selucer's death, the value of one life, or Rs. 350, plus Rs. 75 as
sharmána, is taken from his heirs and the feud is ended. Among the
Mishtis no sharmána is exacted, and, if both the erring wife and her
paramour are killed, no feud results, and no further demnand is made
on the latter's beirs. In some cases, where the seducer is poor, the
amount of compensation is reduced by mutual consent, but is never
less than Rs. 240 (Kábuli). The custom, however, of accepting com-
pensation for a wife's dishonour is rare among the Orakzai, who regard
it as a disgrace Divorce is not common and is only resorted to in
exceptional cases, and never for purposes of gain. The practice is
said to be rare among the less civilised tribes, like the Ali Khels, but
fairly common with the Sheikbáns and other sections, who have more
frequent intercourse with British territory. ,
Dower.--The amount of dower varies from Rs. 15 to 101 among the
Orakzai, and is invariably paid in full before the celebration of the
marriage. The usual dower among Sbias and some of the Sunni
clans is Rs. 101 for a virgin, and ils. 50 for a widow (Kábuli). In
poor families, and in some exceptional cases, the dower of a virgin is
reduced to Rs. 50. Among the Ali Khels, who are a poor tribe, the
dower is fixed at Rs. 26 or 31, or in rare cases Rs. 60 (Kábuli).
Burial.--The funeral ceremonies are the same as in British terri-
tory. The janáza or funeral procession, however, is only preceded by
mulláhs carrying three Qoraus, and never more. Gur also is substitut-
ed for sweetweats at the burial of children. Skát or alms are dis-
tributed to the mulláhs, and a feast is given to the friends of the de-
ceased after the janaza ceremony, but not generally on such a large
scale as is the custom in Kohát. The Orakzai cemeteries are not so
neatly kept as those in Afridi limits, where blue, white and yellow iris
flowers are planted over the graves. This pretty custom is only
occasionally practised among the Orakzai clans. The body in the grave
is covered with a layer of short sticks, shami, the interstices between
which are filled up with wet mud. The grave is then built up on four
sides with three layers of dry stones, the space within being filled up
with dry earth. The head of the corpse is always placed to the north,
and the grave of a female is dug deeper than that of a male. Over the
grave tornbstones are placed, carved or plain, according to the per-
son's means. Occasionally, pieces of wood, 2 feet long by 6 inches
broad, are substituted for tombstones, and in some cases these are
rudely carved and decorated on the top with the figures of birds. A
man's grave has only two tombstones, one over the head and the other



Orakzai inheritance.
183
over the knees, the first with its edges facing north and south, and the
second similarly turned east and west. A woman's grave has throu
tombstones over the heart, navel, and knees, all of which are parallel,
and face north and south with their edges east and west.
The graves of mulláhs are distinguished by a white flag stuck on a
stick at the head and a kuza, or water pot, in the middle. Shahids, or
martyrs for the faith, are also admitted to the privilege of a flag on
their graves. These are mostly white, or red and white.
Inheritance.-The rule of primogeniture does not obtain, all the song
being entitled to an equal share in their father's property. The
father has a right to will away his whole property to one son to the
exclusion of the rest, but this is very rarely done. All the sons are
bound to join in the funeral expenses of their father, and, if any
fails to do so, his share of the property, moveable and immoveable,
is reduced by this amount The rules regarding succession are
generally the same across the border as in British territory, devolution
of property heing regulated on the pagwand system. The only
important difference is that a widow has no interest in her deceased
husband's property, which devolves integrally on the next of kin,
whose transferable property she becomes. If she is young and attrac-
tive, the heir weds her himself, or marries her eitber to one of his
relations, or to an outsider. If she is old, and without any marketable
value, she is maintained by the heir, and in return is bound to perform
household duties. There is a curious custom, however, in vogue
among the Khadizais, under which women have equal shares with
mon in the property of a deceased relation.
Partition.--Among the Orakzais the following clans still preserve
the system of vesh or periodical partition of land :-
(1) Khadizais.
(4) Lar And Khels.
(2) Isa Khels.
(5) Shaokanris.
(3) Bar And Khels.
Among the Khadizais the custom of khula vesh is in vogue,
by which every person, male or female, is entitled to a share in the
land. Women, when married within the tribe, carry their shares with
them, but should they marry into another tribe, their shares revert
to their own clan. The lands of the Khadizais are generally divided
every third year. The other clans named pursue the system of band
vesh by which the male members only of the tribe possess shares. The
Isa Khels divide their lands every five years, the Bar and Lar And
Khels every three years and the Shaokanris every 8 to 15 years.
Hospitality. The Orakzais .regard hospitality as a sacred duty.
Sunni Orakzais having no hujras put up a guest in the village mosque.
Shias however have hujras. The inviolability of a guest is strictly
observed, a matter in which the Orakzais contrast favourably with the
Wazírs.
Amusements and Festivals.-The Orakzais observe the usual Mu.
hammadav feast days, and the Nauroz which is essentially a Shia
festival. On some occasions, e.g., the Shab-i-Barát, large bonfires
(katamirs) are kindled by boys, to the accompaniment of volleys, On



184
Orakzai feuds, etc.
festive occasions the bulbula is also danced round a bonfire, as among
the Bangash. Drum-beating is another common form of displaying
joy, though the mulláh: discountenance it. Drums and sarnais are the
chief musical instruments, the rabáb being rare, Their games are
sakhi, pataghunai, chindro and kuni, the last alone being played by
adults.
Shias smoke tobacco in a chilam, but among the Sunnis the mulláhs
discourage smoking. They also discourage thë use of charas. Opium
and bhang are unknown.
The blood-feud. The usual rules appear to be in force. Kanrai
kegdar, lit. 'to place a stone,' is the term for a truce.*
War-flags.--- All Orakzai lashkars are accompanied by standards which
form rallying points in battle, and which are never allowed to fall into
the hands of the enemy, if this can be avoided. A flag is triangular in
shape, with tasseled ends, and is usually made of calico of the size of a
head short, cut diagonally across. They are made by women, and are
Ambellished in the centre with different designs, such as a crosa, 8wás-
tika, or the prophet's hand, the last being sometimes provided with six
fingers and sometimes with five.t
These designs are commonly worked in cotton (red on a white ground,
or vice versa), or more rarely embroidered in silk. As a rule, the fags
are not ornamented with the kalima or vorges from the Korán, nor is
the flag blessed by a mulláh.
Clientship.-All Hindus live as hamsáyas under the protection of a
powerful malik, called their náik or patron. When accepted as a ham.
siya a Hindu slaughters a sheep or goat as an offering to the náik,
this ceremony being called lokha varkawal or bhanda dena, lit. 'to
give a vessel.' Náiks are seldom changed and even a widow may suc-
ceed to the position of a náik. One of the duties of a hamsiya is to
lend money to his patron at reasonable interest. The loau is scrupu.
lously repaid.
Hamsáyas pay the following dues :-
(©). Gong, on the occasion of a marriage in the hamsáya's family-Rs. 20 or 80
to the permanent nåik.
(ii). Darwáza, or door tax : Rs. 5 to the nóik in, or near, whose house the hamsáya
is living, on a similar occasion.
(iii). Henna is offered to the náik at the Id and some meat given in return.
(iv). At a marriage in the náik's family the hanısáya presents sugar or sweatmeats,
receiving a present in return.
The Hindus. The Hindus speak Hindki in their own families, using
Pashto in conversation with Muhammadans. Tbey wear red stripes in
their white trousers, silk or cotton needlework of the same colour on
* The origin of the phrase cannot now be traced but there used to be an analogous custom
in Rájputána, which may suggest an explanation. In Rájputána, in ancient times, whon a
boundary dispute was settled, a stone was set up on the line agreed upon with an inscrip.
tion detailing the terms of settlement, and calling down cursos on the party who was guilty
of infringing it. In former days inter-tribal quarrels most frequently related to disputed
boundaries, and it is possible that the phrase in question recalls a time when a stone was
actually erected to mark the settlement or temporary cessation, of such a foud.
† The spread hand is supposed to denoto the Panjtan, and thus to be a shia emblam.
(N. IN. Q. SS 42 and 747.) Tho significance of the hand in this case is not axplamoda



Orakzai clans.
185
the collars and sleeves of their shirts, and a red fringe to their turbans.
The Hindus generally marry in their own castes, as Khatris with
Khatris, and Aroſas with Aroſas, and inter-marriage between Hindus
and Sikhs is not uncommon. Brides are scarce and cost Rs. 500 to 400.
There is however no divorce.
The Hindus are sewaks or followers of the Jogi ascetics. Some
Sikhs are kesadhári or followers of Gurú Nának and disciples of the
Bedi families, but they seldom receive the pahul or observe Sikh rites,
and they eat meat of animals killed by kutha, i.e., halal'd in Muham-
madan fashion. Other Siklis are sahidhári or mona and followers of
the Sodhi families, but differ little from the others.
Dependants.-The Hindus and Sikhs are mostly shopkeepers or
pedlars. The Orakzais have also the following kårigars, artizans who
are non-Afgháns :-
1. Porters, too few to supply the demand.
2. Dyers, chiefly among the Mishtis and Ali Khels.
3. Goldsmiths, one or two families in each clan. The Mámozais have a separate
kandi or sub•division of goldsmiths.
4. Blacksmiths and carpenters. Almost every village of any size has its own
blacksmith and carpenter, but in some places the same mau discharges both
functions.
5. The Dúm or barber, who has several functions to fulfil, being a drummer at
festivities, etc., and a go.between in feads.
6. Weavers, who are all Orakzais, as weaving is an honourable calling. They
also clean cotton.
All the above classes, except the last, are, as a rule, hamsàyas. Only Nos. 4 and 5 how.
over are paid in kind, the rest being paid in cash,
It will be observed that there are no scavengers, workers in leather, or midwives.
Appendix of Orakzai clans.
ISMAILZA1.-1. Rabia Khels.* This clan bas six sections or khels :-
i Payao Khel.
iv. Farukhsháh Khel.
ii. Babbi Khel.
v. Ayaz Khel.
iii. Afzal Khel.
vi. Brahim Khel, a hamsáya section.
This clan is noted for its fair complexion, blue eyes and brown hair. ,
The first 5 sections alone are true Rabia Khels. The Payao has 4
nmosis, the Afzal and Farukhsháh 3 each, while the Babbi Khel has 4
sub-sections called Dallak Beg, Haidar Beg, Waz Beg and Khan Beg.
2. Akhel : with three main sections :-
Masan Khel.
| Mandra Khel,t and
Sarki Khel, Wazírs, not true Orakzais. / Bindki Khel, a sub-section.
The Masan Khel contain 3 kors. The other sections being divided
into khels or nmásis.
3. Mámazai : with five main sections :-
i. Machi Khel.
liv. Khwas Khol.
ii. Miro Khel.
v. Khadi Khel.
iii. Sikandar Khel.
The Mámazai are also called Darradár, 'the people holding a ravine.'
dara, or serrated ranges in the form of a jaw (darrah). `Each khét
is divided into several nmásis.
* Ziárat Makhadi is the reputed ancestor of the Rabia Khels.
+ Ziárat Akban Sáhib, the ancestor of the Dallak Nmási, a sub-section of the Mandra
Khel, is held in high repute by all the neighbouring tribes.



186
Orakzai clans.
4. Isa Khel :* also called Faqir. They are inviolable and their curse
is much dreaded. They have four main sections :-
Gawar Nmási,
Kali Khel.
San Khel.
Miru Khel.
This division has no sub-sections.
5. Khadizai : with seven sections :
i. Nur Sher Kandi.
v. Miru Khel.
ii. Malam Nmási.
vi. Bahadur Khan Nmási
iii. Ahmad Khel.
q'ii. Tarkhan Kbel.
iv. Ramdad Khel.
No sub-sections.
6. Sadda Khels : with five sections :-
i. Naqshband Kor.
iv. Farid Khel.
iii Kabir Khel.
t'. Mohammad Khel.
iii, Sulemán Khol.
No sub-sections.
7. Brahim Khelo:
i. Zare Nmási 1 Hanadyas of the 1 iii. Shah Mansur Khel | Bamsáyas of the
ii. Tal y ) Rabia Khels. Liv. Madda Khel
Ali Khels.
8. Ali Khels :t with seven sections:
. i. Khwaja Hawás Khel.
v. Matanni Khel.
ii. Jasrat Khel.
vi. Tskarai Khel.
Hamsayas,
iii. Aimál Khan Khel
vii. Bábá Nmási Sayyidán, )
iv. Zanka Khel.
The Ali Khels are Yusufsai by race. The Matanni came from
Kufa, and are closely conneoted with the Khalil village of Matanni in
Peshawar. The Tskarai are by origin Ghilzais of Wardak. The Bábá
Nmási are Sayyids who are Shias, as are also said to be the Sarwar
Nmási, Brahim Nmási, with half the Khwaja Nmási sub-sections of
the Churi Khel, Khawája Hawás Khels. . This tribe are all weavers by
trade, and will only give daughters to weavers or to men conversant
with some useful trade or to soldiers.
The Khwaja Hawás Khel section has six sub-sections called khels.
Nos. ii, iii, iv, v and vi are also divided into nmisis or khels : and vii
has three sub-sections, Mir Niyámat, Mir Sháhwali and Mir Karím.
9. Mishti :$ with six sections :-
i Darui Khel.
i iv. Drewandi (Wand grai).
ii. Hassanzai.
V. Utmáni
iii. Khumarai (Haidar Khel).
The Mám izai were originally a sub-section of the Mámazai Daradár
tribe, but were expelled by the Ismailzai division for flaying a calf
alive, whence they are known as the Khichan or dirty clan. Each
section contains two or more khels or sub-sections, but the Drewandi
have three sub-sections, Mamarzai, Dad Khel and Bablolzai. The
Drewandi appears to be a sectarian division.
vi. Mámizai Hamsayas.
* The shrine of their ancestor at Ziárat Jhandasam is the principal shrine of the Rabia
Khels. No. 1 supra.
7 Ziárat Panjtan is reverenced by Sunnis and Shias alike. Vows aro made for sons,
Zibrat Mulish Hosain,



Orakzai clans.
187
10. Shaikhan :* with three sections :-
1. Bázíd Khel.
iii. Umrzai, including a Tíráhi or abori.
ii. Samozai.
ginal sub-section..
The Shaikháns are said to have come originally from Gardoz in
Waziristán. The Shaikhán sections are also divided into khele.
11. Malla Khels :f with three sections :
i. Qutab Khel.
| iii, Char Khela. Zakri Khel.
ii. Aziz Khel.
This tribe is of Ghilzai origin, or according to one tradition descend-
»d from a Shirazi mullah by a Bizoti woman.
Like No. 10.
12. Massozai :f with three sections :-
( Mastu Khel.
i ii. Khwaja Khel.
į. Landizai > Abdul Mizzi.
iii. Alizai, with three khels and cho xat,
(Asha Khel.'
with four kors and one khal.
LASHKARZAIS.-13. Mamozais :f with five sections :-
1. Adu Khel.
l iv. Abdurrahim Khel.
ii. Sipoh.
V. Mir Kalán Khel.
iii. Abdurrahman Khel.
14. Alisberzais : with two main divisions, sub-divided thus :-
Umar Khan Khel.
1. Sweri or Northern.):
Masar Khel.
Mir Ahmad Khel.
2. Pitao or Southern.
Kaisa Khel (8wers only).
Bain Khel now hamsáyas, though once a separate section.
There is a Khan Khel in the Pitao division, and the first Khán is said
to have been Saadat Khán, son of Wilábat Ruán, WazÍr of Yarkand.
15. Bain Khel :// now incorporated in the foregoing and rapidly
becoming extinct.
DAULATZAI8.-16. Utmán Khels : 1 with two sections :
6. Fateh Khán Khel.
T ii. Baranka Khel.
* Ziárat Shaikh Mahmat Nikka, the ancestor of the Shaikháng
t Ziárat Karm lláhi or Nikka Tang, on the hill so named.
* Ziárdt Jao Durrah,--This shiine is believed to be the tomb of the prophet Lam
(Lamech), and is much venerated by the surrounding tribes. 'To make seven consecutivo
visits to it is said to be a specific for rheumatism.
$ Ziárat Bain Nika near Bain Khel is much venerated by Sunnis : and a horseman must
dismount when passing it. Produce may be deposited here in perfect security, as a thief
trould be punished with paralysis. This is the shrine of the Sweri Alisherzais. The Pitaos
have the Ziárat of Ali Safi, the ancestor of the Ghurbinais, which is venerated by both
Sunnis and Sbias, and at which vows are made for sons.
ll Ziárat Shah Darwesh.—This shrine is held in much respect by Sunnis. A stone taken
from the shrine is said to bring instant relief in cases of fever.
Ziárat Guta Rhel.-On the bank of the Khanki. This shrine is said to be visited by
both Muhammadans and Hindus, and like many others is much used for the safo custody
of grain or other property.
Žiárat Mián Wali Bába.--This is a venerated shrine, a visit to which is believed to cure
madness. Such, indeed, is the respect inspired by the departed saint that even wolves and
leopards come to pay-obeisance at the shrine, and depart without causing any injury to
their human fellow-worshippers.
q Ziárat Shaikh Babarki at Balandar.-It is stated that the Utmán Khels on proceeding
to their summer settlement leave all such property, as they do not require for their immedi-
ate use, within the precincts of this shrine, and lind it intact on their return next winter.
The people believe that any one violating this shrine by appropriating property deposited
therein is sure to die. Even birds picking up grain inside the sacred precincts meet this
fate! This holy man is said to have been a Hassan Khel Afrídi and to have settled in
Balandara 200 years ago.



188
Orakzai clans.
17. Firoz Khels :* with two sections :
i. Jaisal Khel.
lii. Sarang Khel.
18. Bizotis : with four main sections :-
į. Kambar Khel.
1 iii, Chawar Khel.
ii. Yar Kuli Khel.
iv. Mir Kuli Khel.
Bizoti: from, apparently, Bizot, one of their settlements.
19. Alizais, or Sturi Khel : divided into-
1. Tirah Sturi-Khel.
2. Bara
The real Sturi Khels had two sections :-
1. Lálbi Kbel, descendants of Lál Beg (now almost extinct).
2. Afzal Khel, settled in Bára.
The Tíráh Sturi Khels have now three hamsáya sections :-
i. Tazi Khel )
ii. Bar And Khel All Shias, except the Anjanni sub-section of the Lar And Kbel.
iii, Lar And » )
The Bára Sturit or Afzal Khels have eight sections :-
i. Karam Khel.
v. Shkundai
ii. Mitha
vi. Sayadan
iii. Bára 1
vii. Bára Anianni | Hamsáyas,
iv. Mulla o
viii. Chamkanni
The Sturi Khel was at first only a branch of the Alizai clan,
but its collateral branches have died out and so the Alizais are now
called Sturi Khel, The organization of this clan is very obscure, but
it has clearly been affected by the Shia-Sunni, strife and possibly by
the Roshanía movement which convulsed Tíráh in Mughal times.
MUHAMMAD Khels (S814s).—20. Bar Muhainmad Khels: with five
sections :
i. Khoedád Khel.
1 iii. Mirázi Khel. )
ii. Allahdad 1
iv. Bába Nmási. $ Bamsáyas,
v. Tiráhi.
This is the most powerful of the Muhammad Khels. The Baba
Nmási are Shia Sayads, from Shiráž. The Tíráhi are aborigines.
21. Mani Khelsg (Shias): with eight sections.
* giárat Savuid Rhalil Bábá. - Khalil Bábá was the ancestor of the Bàbá Nmási Sayyids.
who are now settled in the Bar Muhammad Khel country. He is claimed as their patron
saint by Shias and Sunnis alike. The shrive is held in high respect by the surrounding
tribes, and is much visited by people desiring the birth of a son..
Ziárat Mulláh Ghanu Khán. - This shrine is much resorted to by Aka Khel Afridis,
Mishtis, the Daulatzai clans and Sturi Khels.
Ziárat Tor Faqir -Is another shrine in the same village. This miracle-working saint is
held in high esteem by the Sunni clans in this neighbourhood. Cf. Malik Tor, No. 33
below.
+ The Bára Sturi have a shrine called the owo baithak or sitting place for seven men, the
xiórat of Shaikh Bayazid Shah, who was asked to prove his sanctity by taking hold of a bar
of red-hot iron. This he did, but he burnt the village, which was thenceforward called
Swaikot or the burnt fort.
I Divided into Nizam Nmási and Mutakki Nmási.
& Ziárat Nanawar.--This shrine, which is much respected by the Mani Khels, was built
on the spot where an ancestor of Sayyid Gul Badsháh stopped to rest on his way through tho
valley. 'There are several springs in the vicinity of this pleasantly situated shrino, and
pleasure parties resort to it from all the neigbouring villages.



Oria Khel-Othuál.
189
22. Sipágas: with four main sections ;-
1. Mitha Khán Khel.
iii. Ambára Khel.
ii. Sultán Khel.
iv. Lashkari ,
This tribe has two shrines, Ziárat Pír Kamál Shah, at Usi :* and
another of Pír Saidan Sháh.t
23. Abdul Aziz Khels :f with three sub-sections :
į. Kamal Khel, Shias.
iii. Azar Khel.
ië. Kadam ,
A second Khánship is vested in the Kamál Khel, in the descendants
of Malik Tor, once a zealous adherent of Ihdad. The chief and his
immediate family are Sunnis.
24. Sultánzai or Astánzai: now almost extinct though once an
important Shia clan.
25. Brabímzai.
ORIA KHEL, see Uria Khel.
Oswál, see under Bhábra and Jain.
OTAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
OTARá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Oſaí, (1) a camel driver : (2) a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar
and Montgomery.
OTowál, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Othwál, not pronounced Untwal in the Chenáb Colony, is a tribe
of the Jhang Bár. It has nothing to do with the Baloch who as a
camelman is often called unțwal. The Othwal have two branches,
one on each side of the Rávi : and the tribe is not apparently found
elsewhere. They say they are Chughattas and came from Delhi.
Siálwála is their head-quarters in these parts. Another version says
they are Púnwars and came from the Multán direction : they came in
the time of Nárang, previously known as Nar Singh (a Sikh ? according
to the mirási), who was converted by Baháwal Baq. They are said to
give their daughters to the Kharrals, but not to intermarry witb either
the Baloch or the Chaddrars.
* Ziárat Pir Ramál Shah Usi.---This saint was the grandson of Makhdúm Jahanian of Uch
in the Jhang district, and died about 11 () years ago. He was unmarried and went by the
name of Qalandar. This shrine is held in high esteem by the Sipayas.
+ Ziárat Pir Saidan Shah Bukhári.-dt Toi Mola. This saint was a cousin of Hazrat
Makhdúm Isá of Bilot in the Dera Ismail Khán district. He settled in the Sipaya country
about 200 years ago, and died there. His remains were taken to Bilot for burial, the
present shrine, being built over temporary resting place
I Ziárat Mart Mir Kasim.--Mast Mír Kásim is claimed as their patron saint both by the
Sunni Daulatzais and the Shia Muhammad Khels, and his shrine is held in profound respect
by both clans alike. A false oath taken at this ziárut lays the perjurer open to severe
pains and penalties. Sayyid Mir Askar of Kalaya regards this saint as his progenitor
$ Malik Tor (or the Black Chief). is a curious title for a Suuni Khan. It can only have
been borne by the Malik as long as he was an adherent of the Roshanias.



191
PACHÁDÁ, -DRÁ, PACHHÁDÁ. A tribe of doubtful status, but generally known
as Rájputs, found in Hissár. Without exception all are Muhammadans,
and their name* and local traditions point to the western rivers, Indus,
Ráví and Sutloj as their original seats. They are divided into four
clans, (i) Sohu claiming Chauhan ancestry through Lál, a son of Jatá
who founded Bhirrána after migrating from Ráwalpindi (1), via
Bhatner and Ránia, but tradition also says they came to the Ráví
from Jílopattan near Jaipur: (ii) Sukhera, descendants of Sukha,
son of Thirpal, a Tunwar of Bahuna who married a Játní and lost
statust : (iii) Hinjráon, claiming to be Sirohá Rajputs and inter-
marrying with the Sohus : (iv) Chotia or Bhaneka, claiming Chauhan
ancestry, but probably more immediately descended from Dandiwal
Játs, q. v.
The facial type of the Pachbáda, according to Mr. P.J. Fagan,
points to a closer connection with the tribes of the Western Punjab
than with the Rajputs of Rájpotána or the Játs of the Punjab.
Wretched cultivators and typical cattle-thieves they are indolent to
& degree and utterly improvident. Cattle-raising is their tribal occu-
pation, but agriculture is gradually taking its place. During the
Mutiny of 1857 they seized the opportunity for a turbulent outbreak
and owing to their hard, unrelenting temperament are sometimes
called Rathi (ruthless) by their neighbours.
The Pachhádas cannot be classed under the head of good cultiva-
tors. They are pastoral in their tendencies. Prior to British role
they were professional plunderers. The booty they used to divide
(setting aside a portion for the heirs of the slaid, which was known as
káráh), allotting two shares to cavalry and one to infantry. When
British rule began, they turned cultivators, not from choice but from
necessity. But they had no idea of what their rights were, therefore
all the people of a village used to combine to cultivate their lands.
This combination was known as a láná. The produce of the land
used to be divided according to the following rates :-
Share.
(a) Two men with two bullocks ... ... ... ... . .. ... 1
(6) One man with one bullook, or only two men or only two bullocks ...
(c) One man or only one bullock ..... ... ... .. ..
When, however, after a time they became more used to their work,
this system was superseded by another mode of distribution called
chaubacha or four kinds of division as follows:
1st.Per house; every chula or fire-place was looked upon as a
house. This division was called Kurhe-ká-bách, and was
adopted because the people used to burn villagu jungle for
fire-wood.
* Doubtless derived from Pachhim, 'west.'
In spite of this mésalliance the Sukheras will not condescend to marry their girls to
other Pachbádas.
| For Rath, sep under Obauhan,



192
Pacheda-Páhal.
2nd. Per every head of cattle, because they grazed in the village
pasture. This was known as arig-shumâri-bach and was col-
lected according to the following rates :
Share.
(a) Each buffalo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
(6) Each cow and bullock not used for the plough (which were excluded)
(c) Each grazing calf ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ...
3rd. Per pagri, or on every individual above 12 years of age. This
was the rule, but when hard pressed for money, lads under 12
.. were also included. This went by the name of pagri-bách.
This was done because they used to cut grass or collect pálá.
4th.-On the land; under this was included only that portion which
was cultivated during the harvest.
5th.-There was no fixed rule by which they were guided in collecting
the chaubacha. In favourable seasons when the harvest was plentiful
the rate on the land used to be increased ; otherwise it diminished and
the other rates increased, which was productive of one principal evil, viz.
the levy of government revenue from those who had po share whatever in
the land, such as Bánias and others. Besides this, the system had an.
other defect, in that it made the cultivators careless, indifferent and
lazy, for they knew that whether they cultivated their land or not, the
Goveroment demand would be paid by a proportionate increase of other
dues. Some Ját villages had also adopted this chaubacha system.
Hissár Settlement Report 1895, p. 10.
PACHEDA, or Jaun, a tribe of aborigines found in the Rachna Doáb, in the
vicinity of Nainakoţ and at the foot of the Jammu hills in Sialkot,
according to Prinsep.* He adds that the original tribes are also known
as Yahars or Yeers in the Jech and the Sindh Ságar Doábs and that
the Yahars were a pastoral race, living in juns (? jans) or rude mat buts,
chiefly along the banks of rivers. They were numerous and powerful
tribes and in this time the whole country was studded with thick
forest. The Jhuns may be represented by the small sept of Jhun
Játs found in Jhun and a few other villages of Sialkot tabsil and in
Jammu.
PADAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán and in Kapúrthala.
Pádná, fem. PADHjání, a Brahman who directs ceremonies at weddings, etc.
See Panjábi Dicty., p. 839..
Papi, - Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
PAGAL PANTH, a sect or order of the Jogis, so called after a bird which like
a bat hangs itself by the feet downwards (? a swift), in allusion to the
habit of its members of worshipping God while standing on their
heads. Three mahants of this sect are buried in the Kala Mahal of the
Jogi monastery at Buhar in Rohtak.
Pápal, a trib- of Bágļi Jáțs, probably found in Hissár.
* Sjálkot Settlement Report, 1865, § 136,
| Ibid., § 134. A solitary Megh of Ohak Chibhán in Siákot is said to be a Pachaida by
got, but the Meghs return no such got,



Pahári-Pakimor.
193
Paráñí, fem. -AN, a mountaineer, a bill man.
Páni, an alum miner; fr. påh, alum. Dera Gházi Khan Gazetteer, p. 12.
Pávor, a Ját clan found in Babírwala tahsil, Multán district, and reputes
to be one of the four most ancient tribes in that tract. See Khak:
A lso found in Montgomery.
Pasuliá, pán-, fr, pahul, páhul. A Sikh who has been baptized.
PAINDA Kael, see under Wazír.
PAKLAI, see Badhan.
Paknáwají, -aují, fr. pakhauj, a drum or timbrel: a drummer.
PakHíwáRA.-A criminal and vagrant tribe found chiefly in the Sialkot,
Feroze pore and Gurdáspur districts. Since they were registered
in the first named district, în 1878, they have shown a tendency to
migrate into the two latter. The Pakhíwáras found in the Lahore
district are not usually criminal, but live by selling vegetables and
are thence also known as Kunjras. They are also called Chișiinárs,
because they are hereditary hunters and fowlers. From Ludhiana it
is reported that the Pakhíwáras are undoubtedly an offshoot of the
Hårní tribe and are also known as Machhímár (6shermen), Meo (with
probably a similar meaning), Chiệímár and even Aráíộ.
Their owu tradition is that a soldier of rank was sent on an ex.
pedition by a Mughal emperor, but meeting with defeat he sought
an asylum in a Kingra's hut and eventually espoused his daughter,
He went through the ceremony wearing a blanket, like those still
worn at weddings by the Pakhíwáras in Siálkot. When all danger
was over, the soldier returned to Delhi but the emperor taunted him
with being a pakhi-wara or dweller in a shed,* and drove him away.
He then settled in Sialkot. The Pakhíwáras have a parohit who lives
in Garh Ranba near Delhi and often visits Kot Mokhal in Sialkot.
By occupation the Pakhíwáras are bird-cutchers, hawkers of vege-
tables, watermeo and last, but not least, skilful thieves and burglars.
Their women are often prostitutes.
The wale Pakhíwáras are wheat-complexioned and strongly built, with
large eyes, to which they frequently apply collyriuin. They often
wear a gani or simall rosary round the neck and affect the appearance
of peasants. They dress like Hárnís except that they give a wat
to their turbans, i. c., twist the folds in tying them. Like Hárnís their
women wear the petticoat.
The Pakhiwáras are all Muhammadans and are divided into 15
septs :
Balim.
Chanan
Bhattí.
Jagre Mokho,
Bhútá.
Pibú )
Chauốn.
Pawár.
Dhodho
Sombro.
Dholar.
Varball,
Khokhar.
Vary6.
Kotpál.
Parimor, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
• Another but less probable derivation is from pankhindra or punchi-mára, bird-killer or
catcher,



194
Pákrahmání. Påndhu
PAKRAANÁNÍ.-A Muhammadan sect or order and a branch of the Naushahís
(9. v.). Followers of Shah Rahman, who is buried in Gujranwala, their
practices are the same as those of the Nausháþís, except that when
subject to religious frenzy (wajd) they hang themselves on trees with
head downwards and sway their bodies violently backwards and
forwards, shouting Illallahu till they faint from exhaustion. They
explain this custom by a story about Pák Rahmán ascending to heaven,
and on being recalled by Naushab, thinking it respectful to his tutor
to descend with his head foremost. These practices are, however, said
to be confined to the illiterate members of the sect.
Pálí, (1) a cattle-herd (fr. pálná to nourish) in the Eastern Punjab. (2) In
the Multán Division and the Deraját, the Páli is said to be identical
with the Teli. But other observers say that they are a separate caste,
and carry on all sorts of trades as well as that of oilman. They are
recent converts from Hinduism ; and their marriage customs used to be
as much Hindu as Muhammadan, but they are abandoning tbe former.
PALLEDÁR, (1) a group of tho Sheikhs, (2) Pálhadár or palledár is a cooly
who is disengaged and waiting for a job-fr. pálhá, leisure,
PALU, a Ját got found in tahsil Jíod. It claims descent from an ancestor
named Palu
PALÚRÁN, an agricultaral clan found in Shabpur.
PanMÁ, PAMMán, a name given to Brabmans, by Sikhs and others, in deri.
sion or displeasure.
PANAICH, a tribe of Játs found in Lodhiána. It observes both the jathera
and jandián rites. At the latter the bridegroom cuts the jandi tree
with his own hands, and worships at the spot of their jathera which is
dedicated to this purpose. The pair play at the kangna gamo on re-
turning home. The first milk of a cow or buffalo is given to a Brahman
before it is used.
PaN, a Ját clau (agricultural) found in Multán.
Pánda, fem. -1, a fortune-teller : a learned man, the title of a branch of the
Kanauj Brahmans; a Hindu priest on any pilgrimage
PANDAT, fem. -ání, a learnod man: a title bestowed on Brahmans. See
Pandit.
PINDAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Kabírwála tahsil, Multán
district, and reputed to be one of the four most anciont tribes in that
tract ; gee Khaki
PÁNDESHÍ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
PANDBA, & school-master or Brahman who direc's the weddings and other
ceremonies of a family : a teacher of arithmetic or of the Lande script
i.q. Pádhá See also under Parohit.
PANDARÁLIA.—The name of a Rajput fannryw hich once held Pandhrál or
Rámnagar in the Jammú hills. Bhup Dbar Doo was driven from his
territory by Maharaja Ranjit Singh and finally settled at Shábzádpur
in Ambála. The suffix of the eldest son and heir-apparent is Deo, and
the family claims descent from Rájá Tarwar.
PANDH, a Hindu Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,



Pándi-Pangwal.
195
Pánoí, a bazar cooly=Pallehdár. (Ibbetson). See Palledár.
Pánní, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
PANDIT, a title applied to any Brahman who is well versed in Sanskrit
Grammar (Diyákaran). This qualification, however, does not in any
way exalt his social standing in his own brotherhood. Thus if an
Acháraj becomes a pandit by acquiring a koowledge of Grammar, he is
not regarded as superior to a Sásani, or an aneducated Brahman.
Nowadays the terin Pandit is generally applied out of courtesy
to any Brahman, illiterate or literate, though, strictly speaking, oply
one versed in the Shástras is entitled to be so called.
Titles used to be bestowed opon educated Brahmans according to
the extent of the education they had received, and there were three
grades of educated Brahmans, viz. :-1, Ved-páțhi ; 2, Shath Shastri ;
and 3, Pandits.
The Ved-pathi was well versed in the four Vedas and could recite
them by heart, he was a master of all the Sutras and Upanishads. A
Brahman who only knew the six Shastras was called a Sbath Shastri,
Pándu, a Káfir tribe according to Raverty.
PANEBAL, a tribe of Játs found in Ludhiána. It observes the same customs
as the Panaich.
Pangwál.- An inhabitant of Pángi in the Pángi wizárat of the Chamba
State.
T'his generic name includes the following high castes-Brahmans
Rájpats, Thákurs and Ráthís; and the following low castes-Hálís,
Lohárs, Dákís and Meghs. There are also a few Tibetans in the
side valleys in Pangi, who are called Bhots, but the Pang wals proper
do not eat or intermarry with them. The high castes have no
restrictions on food or marriage among themselves : the low castes
are all endogamous. Among the high castes marriage is prohibited
between kinsmen within five degrees on the mother's and ten degrees
on the father's side.
The observances at betrothal are simple. The boy's father, accom.
panied by a friend goes to the bride's house and opens vegotiatiops.
If the girl's parents consent the boy's father presents the girl's father with
a rupee, an observance called phakki diti, i.e. agsent. The boy's father
most go to the girl's house again within a year to confirm the alliance,
and this is known as chakkháni, iterally, to eat food. The boy and a
friend accompany him and the boy presents the girl with a pair of
earrings (bálu) and a bracelet (kangan), which collectively are called
bandha and the observance is spoken of as bandha dena. The bridegroom
also brings with him luchís or cakes which he pats down in the chula on
birch bark, and on these he places Rs. 12 as a present to the girl's
father, called sidiálí in Kilár and Darwas parganas, and banna in Sách
pargana. He also does obeisance at the feet of the giri's mother and
plesents to her Rs. 3, called thilaul in Kilár and Darwas and guá mi in
Sách. The betrothal is then irrevocable, and if the boy anruls it he
must pay the girl Rs. 6 for her mán (consent); whereas if the girl
annuls it, the boy, or his guardian, if he is a minor, can clair anlimited
damages in court. Betrothal may be at any age.
Pathe girl's parentance called din within a yo eat food.
I
pair of



196
Marriage in Pángi.
Two forms of marriage ara in vogue of which the superior form is
called janji or jáni. The bridegroom with his friends goes to the
birdo's house and all the wedding guests are assembled in one room,
the bridal pair sitting side by side, the bride being on the left.
In Sách pargana three totus* (cones) of sattu (gram parched and ground
and then mixed with water) about a cubic high are prepared, with a
hollow at the top into which ghi is poured. The four sides of the
room and the two door posts are touched with a little of the sattu on
one finger, and then à portion is presented to the bridal pair by the
bride's maternal uncle with his arms crossed, and afterwards to each
of the guests. A feast accompanied by singing, dancing and drinking
follows,
Next morning the bride's parents and friends present the suáj
or marriage gifts to her, consisting of sheep, utensils, money, eto.,
according to their means.
The marriage procession then departs to the bridegroom's house,
but the bride's parents do not go, only her brother and other relatives.
There also totus of sattu are prepared, one in Kilár and Darwas and
seven or more in Sách. On arrival at the door the bridegroom's
mother meets the bridal pair with a totu, a lota full of water, incense
and a sheep, and does the wárna ceremony with the sheep by passing
it three times round their heads.t All then enter the house and the
totu or tutus are divided among all by the bridegroom's maternal uncle,
a portion being first presented, as at the bride's house, to the bride
and bridegroom. A feast with songs and dancing follows, and the
feasting is continued over the next day when tumbol or wedding presents
are presented to the bridegroom. On the third day the bride's relatives
take their departure, but before going thuy are given a ball of sattu
with honey, and ench receives a present in money, varying from three
to ten rupees, some of which is often returned. Fifteen or twenty
days afterwards the phirauni ceremony takes place. The bride,
accompanied by her husband, goes to her father's house taking with
them some sattu, luchis or other things as a present, and remains three
or four days.
The bride is often taken home by her husband after the betrotbal
has been completed without any ceremony whatever. This is gene-
rally done privately and, if the girl is of age, without the know-
ledge and consent of her parents. The bridegroom first goes to them
and asks them to name an early day for the wedding, and if they
reply that it cannot be for a year or more, he comes to an understanding
privately with the girl and when a favourable opportunity offers, they
slip away quietly to the husband's home. If the bride is a child the
consent of her parents must first be obtained, and the husband often
carries off his wife on his back. A júni is held in the bridegroom's
house fifteen or twenty days afterwards at which tambol may be
presented to the bridegroom, but none of the bride's friends are present.
The phirauni ceremony takes place by the couple going to the bride's
house after a marriage with a present to her parents, while a rupee is
In Kilár and Darwás no totus are made at the bride's houso.
† The shoep is then killed and given to the Halis.



Death customs in Pángi.
197
wn into the stand the younges pier is somen
given to the bride's mother by the bridegroom, An inferior form of
marriage (topi lani) and the procedure in divorce resemble those in
vogue among the Churális,
Death observances are simple. Lepers and children under a year
old are buried lying on the back and with their hands folded on the
breast, and their head to the north. All others are burnt and the ashes
collected the same day and thrown into the Chandrabhága. The
pyre (chi) may be made of any kind of wood and upon it the body
is placed on its left side, with the head to the north and the face to the
cast. The shroud (masru) is torn into two pieces from the middle
one piece being placed under and the other over the corpse. Ghi is
sprinkled over the wood and the pyre is usually lighted from the head
and the feet.
For three or five days after a death only one meal called upás is
eaten in the house by the relatives of the deceased. On the ninth day
or later a pito is generally erected. This consists of a piece of wood
or a small slab of stone on which is carved a rough effigy of the deceased.
The pitr is set up near a spring or stream by a Brahman in the
presence of a brother or other relatives of the deceased and a young
girl. A sheep is killed in the house and some mantras are repeated
at the stone, and a tokri or basket containing some articles belonging
to the dead person is thrown into the stream. On their return to the
house clothing is given to the Brahman and the young girl. A feast is
then given to the near relatives of the deceased. The pitr is some-
times placed in a small hut near a stream, or near the village and then
it is called a war.
For a year the date of the month on which the death took place is
observed every month as a fast, and only one meal, also called upás, is
eaten. At the end of a year the house is cleansed and the mourning
comes to an end.
Those who can afford it erect a dhaj in memory of a deceased rela-
tive, but this ceremony is so expensive that few can afford to perform
it. A long slab of stone is brought to the villagó, and on ai appointed
day all the people of the neighbourhood assemble. A sheep is sacrificed
over one end of the slab as it lies on the ground and under the direction
of a Brabman it is then set up on end-one end being buried in the
ground. The relatives go round the stone three times from right to
left. Sometimes a rough figure of the deceased is cut on it and over
this ghi is rubbed-while the Brahman repeats certain mantras. A feast
is then given to all who are presadt, and this is the chief cause of
expense. This ceremony usually takes place a year after the death.
Sometimes Rs. 600 are spent.
The family traditions of the Pangwáls point to their having emigrat-
ed from the lower Chenáb and the Rávi and Biás valleys, and also
from Láhui.
The festivals in Pángi are as follows :-
1. The Bishu or Bisoa cn 1st Baisakh, when sauj (small wheaten
cakes soaked in ghi), ghi, incense, vermilion, flowers, rice and guļ are
offered to the Devis and relatives and friends are feasted, lugri, a kind
of liquor made from ailo or barley, being freely indulged in.



198
Panhal-Panni.
2. The Antarain or Mághi on 1st Mágh is held with similar observe
ance, in memory of their ancestors, to whom offerings are made.
3. The Rhaul on the puranmási or full moon of Mágh, when a large
torch called dalputi or chajgi is carried by the head of each hamlet
and waved before the nearest idols. Feasts are given as at the
Bishu mela, and boys make small torches called ghainku or ghiunk
which they swing round their heads in play and then throw at the
walnut trees, in the belief that if the torch gets caught in the branches
the thrower will have a son.
4. The Shorách Shiv-rátri) called Shiwrát in Darwas, Shorát or
Shaurát in Kilár, on varying dates in Phágan, is observed as a fast.
Babris, milk, ghi, and hopey are offered to Shiva and then eaten to
break the fast.
5. The Sil mela is observed on the new moon after the Shiv-tátri
in Mágh or Phágan. It is a day of rejoicing to mark the departure of
winter and the advent of spring. In every house there is eating and
drinking at night. They make a totre of sattu with ghi and flowers
on the top. Rising very early, before daylight, they worship the
various objects in the house, including the family god, and touch all
of them with a little of the sattu. The younger members of each
family do obeisance to the elders. At daylight they go to the houses
of their friends that are near with a bit of sattu or chanáti and make a
salám and eat and drink a little with them, the younger in age always
first, and say bhala dháda (may you be well) to one another. As soon
as the snow clears from the roads they visit their friends and relatives
in more distant villages to offer similar congratulations.
Jätras are also observed in Phágan accompanied by eating, and
drinking. The salutation among all castes in Pángi is Ruár=Řúlár.
The Bális say Raár to the high castes and get the answer “Rám
Rám."
PANHAL, a sept of Rajputs found in Sialkot. It is said to give brides to
the Bajju Rájputs.
PANJGARHIA, or Karora-Singhia--the third dera or military order, sometimes
described as the eleventh misl or confederacy of the Sikhs. The dora
was sub-divided into the Shám Singhián and Kalsia groups; and the
latter was in turn further sub-divided into the Laudpindián and Bará-
pindián or Birk and Jahálián.*
PANJOTARAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
PANJUTTAA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
PANNI, a sept of the Kákar Pagháns, but settled among the Utmánzai in
Pesháwar. Raverty, however, says they are not Kákars, but only a
collateral tribe, being descended from Parnai, one of the four sons of
Dápai, Kákar, Nághar and Dáwai being the other three. Parnai had
18 sons who founded as many sub-tribes, viz., Músá, Langa or Sáng,
Sot, Marghozánai, Jadún, Safai, Shorn, Ali, Mandu, Marghastán,
Dilpal, Yúsai, Qasim, Khajzak, Lawarn, Umar, Jantai and Khatánai,
* Wynyard's Ambala 8. R,



Pannúhan-Paoli.
199
but the last-named and two others, probably Umar and Jantai were
adopted by him. Some of these, e.g. the Yúsai, have died out, but the
GADÓN, Sári, Mósá Khel, Ali Khel, and the descendants of Shorn and
Dilpál are still numerous. Shorn had two sons, Usman and Shadai,
progenitors of the Utmán Khel and Shadi or Nashadi Khel respective-
ly. Dilpál had five sons, founders of the Mamízai, Mardo Khel,
Umarzai, Mulízai and Bu-Bikrzai. Ali had four sons, three of whom
founded the Haibat Khel, Baharzai and Ughzar Khel, the three septs
being called the Dreplári, or "soos of the three fathers. The Músá
Khel, Sots, Khajzaks or Kajzaks, and others hold the country about
Síbí.
PANNÚHAN, a Ját clan found in Shujábád tahsil, Multán district : probably
immigrants from the south.
PANNUN, see Punnun.
Panodán, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
PANON, & Ját clan (agricultural) fouud in Amritsar.
PANSÁBÍ, PAŅ-, PASÁRí, a druggist.
Panthi, PAŅ-, & sectary, Fanjabi Dicty., p. 862.
Panwar, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
PanwÁR, (1) a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Multán ; (2) a tribe of
Játs, according to the Panjabi Dicty., p. 862. See under Punwar.
Panwárí, see TAMBOLÍ.
PANWABIA or Puria, a Ját tribe or got found in Jind tahsil. It derives
its name from pur or hemp, because its progenitor cultivated that
plant, and it still points to the johari purwali or hemp tank near
Gúgáheri in Rohtak as the tank used by its ancestor.
PAOLI, the western Panjábi term for the Juláha or weaver. He is a
Muhammadan and in Jhang the following sections of the caste are
returned :-
1. Ahír.
14. Hamshira.
27. Panwar,
2. Badhar.
15. Jhamat,
28. Qadiáná,
3. Bhatti.
16. Jopú.
29. Rímá.
4. Bhúttá.
17. Joiya.
30. Rohaſ.
Baloch.
18. Kharral.
Sibal.
Bobat.
19. Khichi.
32.
Solgi.
7. Chadhar.
20. Khokhar.
33. Vains.
8. Chanaſ.
21. Lakhisar.
34. Varah.
Chauhán,
22. Langsh.
35. Naul.
Choghattá.
23. Mans úr.
36, Widha.
Dakhna.
24. Moháná.
37. Pharwah.
12. Dúdhí,
25. Chínbar.
Goní.
26, Motha.
The caste is unquestionably made up of fractions of various tribos
which have adopted weaving. so that Mírásis, Mulláns, fishermen, dyers,
Qassábs (cotton-combers), sweepers and even Sayyids are found among
the weavers, having adopted their occupation. But the Paoli is not
invariably a weaver. He is sometimes a field labourer, a coltivator or
in service of some kind. Paoli women also earn something by spinning
and stretching the woof. As regards the Bohat or Bohta section, it
31.
6.
coco



200
Pärácha...
derives its name from its eponym Bohta, and was once a landholding
tribe, according to its Mírásis. The Rehr or Rehre were originally
Khokhars, who, driven out of Delhi under Muhammad Shah, while they
were yet children, were named Rehr, one who crawls. Marriage
within the section is preferred, but it is admissible with any other sec-
tion; and in all respects Muhammadan law and usages are observed.
At Pákpattan in Montgomery there are two 'castes? of weavers, one
called Bhakri, whose women weave, the other Paoli, whose women
consider it a disgrace to do so.
Parácoa, PARÁICHA, PARÁNCHA, PARáCHI, PARÁCHAGI, Paraichí, and Ráchí,
synonym TATTAR in Pesháwar. The term parácha is used on the
frontier, and in the central districts of the Punjab also, for any petty
Muhammadan trader. The Parácha, as a trading caste, is sometimes
called Parácha-Khoja or Rhokar-Parácha. Indeed parácha and khoja
appear to be virtually synonyms, though, as Ibbetson said, the fact
seems to be that in the Rawalpindi and Peshawar Divisions (i.e., in
the north-west of these Provinces) where Parachas are a recognised
and wealthy caste, Khoja is used for miscellaneous Muhanınmadan
traders, chiefy hawkers and pedlers, or at least petty traders ; while
in the eastern Districts and in the Derajat, where Khojas are commer-
cially important, Parácha is used for the Muhammadan pedler. He
added :-i The Parachas of the Salt Range tract require a word of
separate notice. Their head-quarters are at Makhad in Pindí, and there
are also large colonies at Attock and Pesháwar, whence they carry
on an extensive trade with the cities of Central Asia, chiefly in cloth,
silk, indigo and tea. They say that their place of origin is the
village of Dangot in the Bannu district, and that they moved to
Makhad in Shah Jahán's time; but another account is that they were
Khatrís of Lahore, deported by Zamán Sháb. They have seven clans
and give their daughters only to Paráchas, though they will occasion-
ally take wives of foreign origio. They still retain the Hindu title
of Rájá. They will not marry with Khojás and have dropped the
Hindu ceremonial at their weddings, which they say the Khojás of
those parts still retain. They account for their name by deriving
it from párcha “ cloth," one of the principal staples of their trade.
Some of the Parácbas of Ambala seem to call themselves Paracha
Khel.” The present account of the Parachas of Makhad is that
they are descended from Naushírwán, the famous king of Persia, in
the female line. In Attock they say they are descended from one
of his two daughters, Mir Nigal and Mir Afzun, and that their first
known ancestor was Aziz Yamní who lived two centuries after Nau.
shírwán. Originally settled in Persia, they are said to have migrated
subsequently and settled in Dhangot on the Indus, near Kalabágh and
11 miles south-west of Makhad, as a ruling race, but after a time
they were subdued by the Delhi kings, and all of them left the place
and settled in Attock, Naushera, Kohát, Peshawar, Delhi, Ahmadăbád,
Lahore, Bhera, Shahpur, Khusháb, Kálábágh, Makhad, Rawalpindi,
Shekhan in Pesháwar and Jalálábád, Kaman and Kábulin Afghánistán.
Dhangot is now deserted, bnt its ruins exist and all the Parácbas regard
it as their original home. Unlike the Khatri and Arosa converts to
Islám, they are not called Shaikh in Makhad, but the title
of Rájá or Mián is prefixed to their names by courtesy. In



Parácha customs.
201
Attock they say they were originally fire-worshippers, but
were converted to Isláin by ong Muliammad Mustafa and then
became carpet-makers, whence their name, parúcha from firásh, a
carpet. They deny that they were Hindús. All Parachas out of
Makhad and Kalábágh are called Miáp, though sometimes they are
addressed as Shaikh. Those resident in Makhad and Kalábágh aro
called Rájá, because their original seat at Makhad was independent
and the title clung to them even after their expulsion from it. The
following clans of Parachas reside in Makhad: Máhún, Ranyal,
Pacháugla, Bátí, Sáwal, Kela, Kalsiál.* These names are derived
from the names of their ancestors. No other clau of Paracha is found
in Makhad, but in Attock there is a Sukhdal clan. Interwarriage
between the clans is common and all are regarded as ezual. After
their expulsion from Dhangot, the Parichas took to commerce. They
trade according to their ineans in Bokhárá, Kábul, Pesliáwar, Bombay,
Calcutta and other important places. Parachas in poor circumstances
earn a living by keeping petty shops in Makhad, whilə some pursue
agriculture. In Attock most of the cultivating Parachas are Batis.
The Parachas know the Hindi character and nearly all of them keep
accounts in Hindi like Hindús, though some of them can read and
write Urdú and Persian which they learn for religious purposes.
The Parachas wear ordinary clothes. They live within their means
and are, on the whole, a most cconomical and industrious people. They
are very strict in keeping accounts. A too economical person in the
northern Punjab is sometimes picknamed parácha, i.e. a wiser. They
do not indulge in extravagance or in liquor. Their women are kept in
strict prrda, so much so that in Attock a woman is never allowed to see
any male relative except her father, husband, son and her paternal
and maternal uncles. The quality of their dress generally depends
upon their means, but they are comparatively better dressed than the
inen. By religion they are all Sunnís and are mostly the followers of
the Chishtí family of Taunsa Sharif in Dera Gházi Khán, wbile a few
of them Selong to the Qádria sect. Generally speaking, they observe
the rules of Islám somewhat more rigidly than their neighbours, the
Pathans and even than the Awáns. There exists some party feeling
amongst the Parachas themselves. The Bátis form ope party and
the wealthy and intelligent Pachanglas another. Until the last
few generations it was not the custoin for the Báti Kheli to
intermarry with other Paráchas. This khel is said to have only
come from Kohát six or seveu generations ago. Their aocostor in the
8th generation was a Rájá of Khwarra Zíra and the first of his family to
be converted to Islám.
The Parachas contract inarriages among themselves, and do not
marry their girls to other clans. A girl, as a rule, cannot be married
without her guardian's consent, i e. she is bestowed by her father,
uncle, brother or some other near relation. Without such consent
the bridegroom's parents have to pay about Rs. 1,000 as a penalty to
the bride's guardian. Two feasts, consisting of meat and halwa la
preparation of flour, sugar and ghi) arə generally given at a wedding.
No extravagance of any sort is permitted on such occasions. Nearly
* Despite their Hindu look, these clan names do not appear to occur in any other caste.



202
Pára Chamkanni-Parasrámi.
all the foasts at weddings are given with the provious consent of the
heads of the seven clans already mentioned.
These heads are called mutabar or chiļdáhria, 'groy-beard.' They are
authorized to fix the number of guests on such occasions according to
the means of the parents of the bride and bridegroom. Thus they
may direct that the dinner be given only to the potkot (descendants
from ono grandfather) or to the tabila, (other near relatives), or to the
pirchún (all the Parachas of Makhad). No Parácha is permitted to
borrow money on such an occasion and he is considered to have done
all that can be expected of him if he keeps within tho limit of his
savings. The dower is fixed at Rs. 350, which is equal to 500 rupees
Makhadi and ono gold mohar. The Mulláh of the mosque reads the
nikáh and is given a rupee for his services. A few Parachas bave
married Bokhára women, and the children of such wives share equally
with those by Parkoba wives.
PÍRA CHAMKANNI or CHAMKANNI. A small tribe of obscure origin, but
claiming to be GHORIA KEEL Patháng. They inhabit the Kirmán valley
iu Kurram and the head of the Thahai Darra, a tributary of the Khar.
Irána, but are said to be connected with the Chamkannis. or Chake
mannis of Keraia, a village west of Kharlachi in Dera Ismail Khan and
with the village of Chamkanni near Peshawar. For the most part
Sunnis, they respect their chiefs more than Pațbáns usually do and set
apart lands to enable them to exercise hospitality, but pay no taxes.
Otberwise they are described as democratio, ignorant and poserty-
strioken. They have 4 main sections, thus-
1. Khini Khel Mahmud Khán Kho
01. Bilazawai Khel.
Darya Khán Kahol.
3. Háji Khol. Khambar Khel.
(Hussain Khel.
8 Darro Khol. La
e Mirza Khel. j Conochroy Callca sewaja au
Collectively called Khwaja Babol.
But in Kirmán live the Budh or Budha Khel who are Shias and
some Sunni Chamkapnis who also look up to the Sbia chief. He is to
all intents and purposes a Turi.
PARÁICHA, see Paracha: Panjabi Dicty., p. 864.
PARASRÁMI, a sect or group of Brahmans found in the Simla Hills. The
cult of Parasu Ráma is said to have been first established in the hills
at five stháns or places, viz., Kao and Mamel in Suket, Nirwand in
Kulu, Nirth and Nagar in Bashahr, and bhunda* sacrifice was first
performed at them. The Parasrami Brahmans subsequently formed
branches of the cult, called athari,t at Shingla, Shaneri, Larga and
Danga, all in Bashahr, and introduced the bhunda sacrifice there.
*For an account of the bhunda sacrifice see the Simla Hill States Gazetteer, Bashahr
no. 20. 31. It is said that the bhunda, shánd and some other ceremonies are only performed
a villages where tberö aro Khund Kanets, i.e. descendants of tbe old MÁWI families, ibid.
0. 21. But, it is also said, the rite was extended to any place where a Parusrámi Brahman
Settled, and it came too to be celebrated in honour of other deities besides Paras Rám.
t 'The correct Ford appears to be thairi or theri, which means a kind of platform used in
worsbiv. Pandit Tika Rám Joshi gives the 4 ļheris as Landsa, Dándsa, Singar and Sane:
and makes the 5 sthans as in the text: J. A. 8. B., 1911, p. 632. The Simla Hill States
Gasetteer elsewhere makes tho thairi more important tban tho sthan : 800 Bashabr, p. 30.



Parbati-Parohit.
203
PARBATÍ, -iá, a mountaineer : Panjabi Dicty., p. 887.
PARBE, PARBHÚ, fem. -ání, a patron; a term applied by Dúms to those whose
families they serve. Panjábi Dicty., p. 887. It literally nieans 'lord,'
as in Parbh-datt, 'given of the Lord.
PARCHONIA, a dealer in grain and groceries.
PARER, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán : Panjabi Dicty., p. 868.
PARHAR, (1) a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) ; (2) a Balooh clan
(agricultural) ; (3) a Mahtam clan (agricultural)-all three found in
Montgomery.
.::. PARHÁR, a Ját sept found in Dora Gházi Khán : 800 under Dahá. Cf. also
Mírási at page 118, supra. The Parhár is also found as a Ját
clan (agricultural) in Multán. If the word is a contraction of Parihár
the Parhár Játs are the only representatives of the Pratihára Rajputs
in the Punjab.
PARHERHA, see Rangrez.
Paruoli or FARMÚLI, a Tájik tribe according to some, but Afgháng according
to others, and descended from one of the 24 sons of Kákar. The
Parmul are maliks of the Ghilzai and appear to derive their name
from the Parmál or Farmúl darra.
Parnámí, see Chajju-panthí.
PAROBIT.*-A Brahman appointed as priest to a family. The office is hore.
ditary. A parohit must attend his patrons at festivals, and on social
occasions, such as weddings and deaths. Ho receives all the dues of
the first class which are given in charity, the remaining dues being
distributed to other Brahmans. In the event of a parohit being illiterate
he engages a substitute to officiate on his behalf and he is paid half his
dues.
If a parohit neglects to attend his patron's house at a death or wed.
ding he is liable to dismissal from his office. It is his client's duty to
inform him of any important occasion, if his house is situate at a dig.
tance. The women of the parohit's family are regarded as his patron's
own mother, sister, etc., and they are held in the same estimation as his
women folk. Similarly a parohit treats his patron's womenkind with as
much respect as his own. If either party is guilty of adultery with a
woman of the other, for instance, if the wrong-doer is a parohit, he is
dismissed from tho priesthood and if the offender be a patron, the ine
jured parohit goes to the wrong-doer's house and curses him. He also
fasts for two days, and as it is considered a heinous sin, the wrong-doer
propitiates the parohit by giving him a fee (nazrána) in cash or kind.
The doer's brotherhood also imposes a penalty of some kind on him by
way of fine. If a man die childless his kiria-karm or death ceremonios
are performed by his parohit. And if his heir is unfit to perform his
funeral rites, the parohit performs them in his stead. The parohit is
* Tho truo Panjabi form appears to be parohat, fem. ani, ani, or farohtání, -ians.
Panjabi Diety., p. 575,



204
Paropia-Patániyán.
also deputed to officiate for the heir, at the celebration of a jag and
shrádh. There are two classes of parohits :-
(1). Those employed on all auspicious occasions. They are rarely
appointed to act at a kiria-karm, and in this case, all alms given in the
name of the dead, are given to the Acháraj.
(2). Those who are deputed on occasions of mourning such as a
death, kiria-karm, shrádh, etc. They receive all the alms given in the
name of the deceased. But in all the matters of ritual parohits of the
higher grade are employed and paid their dues in cash, after the puri.
fication has been effected. The parohits of bch parties are called in
to decide all disputes arising in connection with weddings or death
observances and their award is regarded as absolutely final. Their
duty consists in reading (jap) from certain books, and in finding out
the auspicious time for every observance. If a parohit does not know
the science of fortune-telling, he arranges with the one versed in the
science to do so on his behalf.
The pádha is the assistant to the parohit and serves under him on all
occasions, at weddings, deaths and festivals. The pádha is employed
to assist the parohit in the worship of the gods, and in supplying all
materials required to prepare the "chauk.”
The pádha also interprets all the verses or mantras recited on any
occasion. He also has hereditary claims on his patrons.
PAROPIA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Pársi, the Zoroastrian class who came from the Bombay Presidency into
the Punjab as merchants and shopkeepers. They are also called
Zardasht, Zartasht, or Zartushti, apparently the Indian form of
Zoroaster-and Sháhinsbábi.
Pasári, fr. pasárná, to spread out; i. q., Pansárí : Panjabi Dicty., p. 880.
PASÁRYs, a Gújar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
Pásí, Pánst, (1) & low caste closely allied to the Khatiks, who indeed
are said by some to be nothing more than a Pási tribe. They are said
to be the professional watchman and thief of the United Provinces and
to derive their name from pása, à noo30. Their original occupation
is said to be climbing the todds-palm by means of a doose and making
toddy. Thoy are a very low caste and great keepers of pigs, and
in the cantonments of the Punjab are often employed in collecting
and selling cow.dung for fuel ; (2) a section of the Khatris*; and (3) a
sub-caste of Brahmans.
Pagor, a Baloch clan 'agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Passání, a Ját clun (agricultura!) found in Multán.
PATÁNIYÁN, a Rájpat clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. Cf. Pathánis.
* Or Páshi. They were all residents of Bbatin la but a fire broke out and all fled, leaving
A chief's son behind. The low who remaiood to look after him woro called Pasi to dis.
tinguish them from the Apási or Aspási who had left the place : Pb. CousUS Rop. 1914,
P. 471. For customs seo Vol. I. c. 525.'



· The Pathán or Afghin,
205
PATRÁN.—The term Pațbán is popularly applied to the members of any tribe
bailing from the north-west frontier borderland of India.* A synonym
is the well-known term Rohilla (Rohela, i.e. an inhabitant of the roh or
mountainous country). Another synonym is Afghan (obgolete plural
A fághioa) but an attempt has been made to distinguish Afghán from
Pathan. On the north-west frontier of India the term Pathán is applied
to any member of the tribes which speak Pashto as opposed to the
Hincki (Indian) speaking subject races, and in the northern Pathan
countries such as Dír and Swát the term Pathán is not invariably a racial
term, and even the Patháps properly so called are not a homogeneous
race, but a cor geries of dominant tribes containing affiliated Hindki
(Indian) and probably Turkish elements.
Language.
The iangaage of the Patháns, with the exception of the UBMARIS who
speak Bargastá, is the Iranian Pashto or Pakhto, the former being
apparently the original form of the name.
According to Mr. Longworth Dames Pashto or 'Afgbáni' is the
language of all the Afgháng. It extends throughout their territory
whether within or without the existing Afghán State. On the north it
is bounded by the Káfir and Dard languages, on the east by western
Panjabi or Lahnda, on the south by Balochi and on the west by
Persian. The total numbers of speakers of Pashto may, perhaps, be
3,500,000 of which 2,000,000 way be in Afghánistán proper and
1,500,000 in British and independent territory. The east Iranian
character of the lauguage is clearly established, although it has under-
gone many alterations and corruptions, and has been so strongly
affected by Indian influence as to lead Trumpp to believe that it shonld
be classed as an Indian language. Geiger gives the following distinc-
tive points as indicating its origin clearly :-
1. Original Aryan dental s (except before t) becomes h ; often lost altogether in modern
pronunciation,
8. The Aryan aspirates become spirants, as in Old Iranian.
8. Tho Aryan surds k, t, p, before consonants become spiranta, and often disappear in
latór forms.
4. Before t Aryan dentals become , as is usual in Iranian.
6. Aryan s becomes 8, as in Iranian; the group sw becomes sp.
8. Aryan x, xh, answering to Indian j and h appear a8 .
A change which is peculiar to Pashto is the general change of d and often of two
The Indian aspirates do not exist and Pashto speakers are unable to pronounce them,
I is frequently dropped in conversation. Indian cerebrals !, d, ? and n exist, but in Indian
words only.
The borrowed element is large. Indian loans affoct not only the vocabulary but the
grammar; even the infinitive termination in al is of Indian origin. Loans from modern
Persian are numerous, and through the medium of Persian a large number of Arabic words
have come in, and even a fow Turkish.
There are two principal dialects, which may be called (1) the north-eastern (with its
centre at Pesháwar) and (2) the south-western (with its centre at Qanda! ár). They are
* Other terrs are in local use, « g.Rasbi is used in the Central Punjab to denote & Parbán
of the labouring, clasa. The word is probably dorived from the Oraph plain in the Hazása
District, tho apcient Urasha.



206
Derivations of Pathán.
distinguished from each other by the pronunciation of certain consonants which aro gut.
turals in (1) and sibilants in 12). These are :-shin or khin pronounced kh in (1) and sh
in (2), g in (1) and % in 2); also sometimes dz in (2) becomes % in (1) but this is not
uniform. Thus :-
(1) Khadra or khaza, “woman” becomes (2) shadza (1) ghrag, “the ear," bocomos (2)
ghuar.
As the same character is used in writing whatever the pronunciation, these spoken vari-
ations do not affect the written language, and they are nowhore sufficient to mako one
dialect unintelligible to the speakers of the other. A very distinct dialect, however, is that
spoken in Bannu, Dawar and Wazírístán, a branch of (2). In this a complete system of
vowel change is found, according to which :
a becomes o
u becomes i
O , e or o
U »
as in plorina for plárúna, pl. of plár, “father,' mer for mor, “mother;" mixh for mush
"we.Among the Afridís also a is oftea pronounced o.
The language in its more cultivated forms may be studied in the works of Dorn, Raverty,
Vaughan, Bellew, Trumpp and Darmesteter.
The word Pakhto certainly suggests some connection with the
Paktyiké of Herodotus, but the identification of Paktyiké with modern
Afghánistán, apparently assumed by McCrindle,* is quite untenable.
Steint identifies Paktyiké with the territory of Gandhára, the present
Peshawar District. This identification suggests a possible solution
of the problem. A conjecture may be hazarded that a race, calling
itself Afghán, invaded the ancient Gandhára and found there à domi.
nant race called Pathán, or dominant tribes which bore that title as &
local equivalent of Rájput and a host of similar terms-and, adopted
it as an alternative to their own desigoation of Afghán. In tbis
connection the following account of the Pathans in Dir, Swát (the
ancient Wdyána) and Bajaur, which is condensed from notes by Sir
Henry MacMahon, may be of interest :-
In Dír, Swát and Bajaur a shareholder or daftari, is entitled to the
name of Pathán as long as he retains his share (daftar) of the tribal
land. A man who alienates his daftar or loses it is no longer entitled
to be called Pathán, but becomes a Faqirt and has no longer a voice in
the village or tribal councils.
: The Patháns of Dír, Swát and Bajaur differ little from the other
Pathans except in that they possess a spirit of discipline, especially in
Dír and Swát. This spirit is, however, much less marked among the
Utmán Khel. It has doubtless been inculcated by their long-standing
system of communal government and the periodical redistribution of
tribal lands. In treachery they may well be given the first place
among Pagháns, but in courage and hospitality they do not compare
unfavourably with them. Superstitious and collectively fanatical they
* Invasion of India, p. 341.
+ Memoir on Maps illustrating the Ancient Geography of Kashmir, 1899, referred to by
McCrindle in his Ancient India, P. 42. McCrindle speaks of the ethnic name Pakhtun, but
there appears to be no such name. But the usages of pukhtunwali, a code (unwritten),
framed on the principles of equity and retaliation, governs the decisions of the tribal jirgas
in Peshawar : Gazetteer, 1897-98, p. 130. Pandit Hari Kishen Kaul, C.I.E., suggests that
Pathán is derived from Pratisthana' well-established : } b. Census Rep., 1912, p. 471.
This suggestion commends itself to the present writer.
+ In Peshawar also faqir is almost, if not quite, synonymous with hamsáya 'dependant'
or vassal,'-Peshawar Zasetteer, 1897-98, p. 134.



Pathán literaturs.
207
are by no means fanatical individually and cases of ghazá aro practically
unknown among them, but their innate spirit of discipline makes tho
colloctive fanaticism, of which they are capable when roused, a remark.
able trait in their character.
The tepures among the Patháns of Dír, Swát and Bajaur are strongly
analogous to their political systems. When the country was first occu-
pied all lands were divided into tappas between the septs of the tribe.
Each tappa was further divided into daftars, one to each khel, and each
daftar was further subdivided into brakhas or bakhras, the individual
shares. Any person possessing a share, however small, in a daftar is
called a daftari, and in order to equalise the shares of each daftari, as
far as possible, the lands of each khel were classed according to the
nature of the soil into vands or wands each bearing some distioctive
local name. Thus a daftari's share was not necessarily a compact piece
of land, but was often composed of scattered plots in several wands.
It was calculated by some recognised unit of measureinent, which varied
in different localities, such as rúcha, rupaiya, paisa, tura, ghonaye,
nimkai, tirao, pan, etc.
Part of the land of the community used, however, to be excluded
from this partition, and allotted to the use of those who had served the
khel or village by sword or prayer. Such land is called seri and is ex-
empt from redistribution or khassure which is otherwise universal,
savo in Sam Ránízai. Seri lands are held sometimes by a powerful
Khán, sometimes for the use of the village or tribal jirga, but more fre.
quently by the village mulla or some member of the priestly classes.
As a rule, they lie on the border between two communities, or are
lands in dispute, and thus form buffers between villages. The periodical
redistribution occurs every 5, 10, 15 or 20 years, and extends to the
lands of whole septs, occasionally even to the tappas, while exchange of
the daftars of khelo and individuals is universal. It says inuch for the
discipline of the community that redistribution is accomplished down to
the smallest fraction of a sub-share of each individual share. At the
end of the 1st year the whole khel casts lots for and redistributes all
the rice lands : at the end of the 2nd year this is repeated : at the end
of the 3rd fresh lots are cast for the rice lands and also for the double-
crop rain lands: in the 4th year lots are cast again for the rice lands
and also for the single-crop rain lands: and at the end of the 5th year
lots are cast for the rice lands alone. At the end of the 6th year the
khel moves off en bloc to a new daftar. The results are disastrous as
no one has the slightest interest in improving the land, developing irri.
gation or building permanent houses. No orchards, no gardens, few,
if any, trees save in the sacred precincts of a ziárat exist.
Literature. The existing literature of Pashto commences from the
16th ceptury, and is mainly poetical, especially histories, such as Akhún
Darweza's Makhzan-i-Pashto aud Makhzan-z-Islámi, and Afzal Khan
Khatak’s Tarikh-z-Murassa. The principal poets are Khushbál Khan,
the Khatak chief, who was for some time a prisoner at the Court of the
emperor Aurangzeb and wrote a Díwán after the Persian model; Mirza
Khan Ansári, a poet of the Súfi school, and the popular poets Abd-ul-
Rahman and Abd-ul-Hamid who have both left Diwáns of a mystical



208
The Pathans in History.
character, also Abd-ul-Kadir Khatak and Ahmad Shah, tho great
Durráni king. Abd-ul-Rahmán is considered by Afgháns to be their
bost poot, but Europeans probably will give the highest place to the
more simple and energetic verse of Khushbál Khán. On the whole
the literature must be considered as artifcial and imitativo, and cannot
olaim to be more than a reproduction of Persian models.
Popular poetry.----But side by side with it there is the genuine
popular poetry wbich has till lately attracted little attention. Darmes-
teter's collection of these poems has rescued then from oblivion; they
are the genuine expression of popular feeling in war, politics or love.
Thorburn has also recorded some ballads, riddles and proverbs ani
some spirited ballads in the Wazír dialect have lately been published
by Mr. E. B. Howell.* None of the popular poetry is of ancient date,
there are no heroic ballads relating to the great migrations and
conquests of the Afghán race except one relating to Ahmad Shah.
Most are of the 19th century. There is nothing to compare with the
fine heroic ballads found in Balochi.
Religious literature.Religious writings both in prose and verse
abound in Pashto ; a great number of works of this type are litho-
graphed at the presses of Peshawar and Lahore. Most of these have
no great merit as works of literature. Mir Hamza, a long po-m, by
Mián Muhammad Sahhaf, may be mentioned.
Alphabet.-Pashto makes use of the Arabic characters in the Naskh
form, and has adopted certain modifications to express the peculiar
sounds of the language.t
The Afghúrs in History.--Fertshta hazarde la cinjecture that the
people of the hills between Kábul and Kandhár, who united with the
Khokliars' and 'Chow bea,' the ancient zamind irs of the Punjab, under
Dúrga of the tribe of Búlhás, governor of Jammu, to expel Kidár Rájá
from the Punjab, were the people called Afgháns in his days, but this
theory appears untenable. No doubt Ferishta sp. aks of the Afghang
as known in year 683 A. D. or even earlier. He cites a lost work, the
Matla-ul-Anwúr as authority for saying that the Afgháns are Copts of
the race of the Pharaohs who refused to embrace the Jewish faith when
Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt and, leaving their country, care
to India and eventually. setiled in the Sulaiman mountains where they
bore the name of Afgháps.l! When Abraha marched against Mecca
& body of Afgbáns accompanied him, but werd annihilated. The
Afgháns had already been converted to Islám when Muhammad bin
Qasim invaded Sind and Multán, and in 682 (A. H. 63) they issued
from their hills and laid waste Kirmán, Shiwarán and Peshawar,
They defeated the forces sent against tliem by the Rájá of Lahore,
.
* Some Border Ballads of the North-West Fruntier.-J. R. A. S., 1907, p. 791.
#Encyclopaedia of Islám, 8. v. Afyhánistán.
Ferishta has Gakkars, but he almost certainly mistcok the Khokhars for the Gakkars.
Tho Chowbea may be the Joiya It is tempting to conjecture that Bálhás is a misreading
of Bájá.
& Briggs' Trans. of the Hist, of the Rise of the Mahomedan Power in India, I, p. lxxi.
# Briggs : op. cit., I, p. 6,



The Pathans in History.
209
and compelled the Indians to retreat on Lahore. The Afgháns also
made aa alliance with the Khokhars* and compelled the Rájá of
Lahore to cede them certain territories in perpetuity. They also
settled the Khalj in Lamghán, agreeing to protect the frontier against
Mahammadan invasions, but the Muhammadan Afgháns, notwithstand-
ing this treaty, continued their depredations, advanced to Pesháwar and
built a fort in the hills which they named Khaibar. They also sub-
dued the province of Roh which extended from Swát and Bajaur to Siwi
near Bhakkar in Sindh and from Hassan-Abdal to Kábnl and
Kandahár. Under the Samanides the Afgháns formed a buffer state
between the kingdom of Multán and Lahore, thus confining the
Sámáni inroads to Sind. But, despite their efforts Sabuktagin, governor
of Seistán, repeatedly invaded Multán and Lamghan. Jaipal, the Rájá
of Lahore, and the Bhattia Rájá then took counsel together and ap.
pointed Shaikh Hamíd, Afghán,t as governor of Multáp and Lamghán
in which districts he placed Afghán garrisons. Hamíd, however, went
over to Sabuktagínt and thus saved his own territories from invasion,
but his son Mahmúd of Ghazni made forious war on the Afgháns and
compelled all the tribes to submit to him,
Khalid bin Abdulla, superseded in the government of Kabul, and
afraid to return to Arabia by the route of Persia, retired with a number
of Arab retainers into the Sulaimán mountains. There he settled and
gave his daughter to an Afghán chief, a convert to Islám. From two
of their many children descended the tribes of Lodi and Sur.
At the battle of Pesháwar in 1008 A. D. 10,000 horse, Turks,
Afgháns and Khalj, pursued the defeated Hindus and in 1010 Muham-
mad, Sur, who appears to have held Ghor, was attacked by Mahmud
in his entrenched camp and taken prisoner. Ferishta then contradicts
his previous account and says that the sovereigns of Ghor and its
people were only converted after this disaster. This is stated on the
authority of the Tawáríkh-i-Yamini.
After this Ferishta has little to tell us about the Afgháns whom he
mentions incidentally under the year 1040 A.D., when the prince
Yazídyár was sent with a detachment to keep in check the mountain
Afgháns near Ghazni.'!| Then in 1049 we read that Ali bin Rabía
and Mírak Husain, being joined by the natives, raised a great army at
Pesháwar and, having reduced Multán and Sind, subdued the Afgháns
who had declared their independence in that country' (sic). This
nation had taken advantage of the public disturbances to plunder
those provinces. Here Ferishta seems to locate the Afgháns on the
frontiers of Multán and Sind.
* Ferishta has Gakkars, as before.
+ Later on, at p. 40, Ferishta calls him Shaikh Hamid, Lodi.
Briggs : op. cit., pp. 6—10. On p. 19 Ferishta adds that the Afgháns and Khali who
resided among the mountains, took the oath of allegiance to Sabuktagin and that many of
them were enlisted in his army.
$ Ferishta says that the Tabaqát-j-Nasiri and Fakhr.ud. Din Mubarik Shah, Lodi, author
of a history of the kings of Ghor in verse, both affirm that they were converted in the time
of Ali and were the only Moslems who remained true to his cause under the Ommayyids,
|| Briggs, p. 111,
T Ibid., p. 130,



210
The Pathans in History.
Sultán Arslán Ghaznavi, when expelled from Ghazni a second time,
sought an asylum among the Afgháns.*
About 1118 A. D., Muhammad Bahlím, who had built the fort of
Nágair in the Siwálik province, raised an army of Arabs, Persians,
Afghábs and Khalj; with which he ravaged The territories of the
independent Indian princes. He aspired to sovereignty, but was
defeated by Bahrám Ghaznavi near Multán. The victorious king
soon after executed Qutb-ud-Din Muhammad Ghori, Afghán, to whom
he had given his daughter in marriage, but Saif.ud. Dín Súri, prince
of Ghor, brother of the deceased, drovo Bahrám into Kirmán (? Kurram)
a town which had been built by the Afgháns to guard a pass in the
mountains between Ghazni and India. Saif-ud-Din attempted to
establish his rule at Ghazni but failed, and he was captured and the
forces of Ghor were defeated. His brother Ala-ud-Din, in revenge,
invaded Ghazni. In the battle which ensued he owed his victory over
Bahrám to the prowess of two gigantic brothers, called Kharmil or
Firmil. Ala-ud-Din plundered and burnt Ghazni, thereby earning
the title of Jahánsoz, and carried off many of its most venorable and
learned men to Firoz Koh where he plastered the walls of his native
city with their blood. After this he returned to Ghor, and soon lost
Ghazni to the Ghuzz Turkmáns, but soon regained it, only to be expelled
from it again by Assamad, a general of Sultán Khusrau, some time
before 1160 A. D. Ferishta next proceeds to make Shaháb-ud-Din,
Muhammad of Ghor, a brother of Ala-ud-Din.
It is now time to pause for a moment and consider whether Ferishta's
detailed and circumstantial, if somewhat fragmentary and confused,
account of the origin of the Afgháns is correct. According to
Raverty, a very high authority, it is not. He states that Ferishta was
misled by the misreading of Lawi' for 'Lodi' as the name of the
ancestor of the Quraish rulers of Multán, who were of the Bani Usmán,
descendants of Sám, son of Lawi, and who were overthrown by Sultán
Mabmúd.S Raverty has further pointed out that Ferishta had jumped
to the conclusion that the Súr Afgháns were connected with and
descended from Muhammad-i-Súri, but the Afghán tradition is very
different. According to it, Shah Husain was descended from the younger
branch of the Ghorian race, while Muhammad-i-Súri, said to be i he
great-great-grandfather of the Sultáns Ghiyás-ud-Din and Muizz-ud-
Din (Muhammad of Ghor) was descended from the elder branch, with
whom the sovereignty lay Shah Husain by one of bis Afghán wives
had three sons, Ghalzi, Ibrahim surnamed Lodi, and Sarwani. The
Afghán tribe of Súr was founded by Súr, son of Ismail, grandson of
Lodi.li In the absence of all knowledge of the sources whence Ferishta
draw his history of the early Muhammadan period it is impossible to
say that the Afgháns were unknown till 1024 A. D. (as stated on p. 3
* Ibid., p. 147.
+ Idid., pp. 151-6.
For the Parmúl Maliks of the Ghilzai, seo PARMÓLI.
& J. A, 8: B. 1892, p 325. Cf. pp. 190-1 on which the late Major iva verty in a copy of his
article on the Mihrán of Sind and its Tributaries has corrected Luwai to Lawi."
| Raverty's Trans. of the Tabaqát. ;-Násiri, pp. 510.511, notes. Raverty also points out, on
0. 320, that only once (and that towards the end of his work).does the author of the Tabaigát
mention the Afgháns,



of Totul they were they had to
Dames on Pathán History.
211
of Vol. II, supra,*) but the history of their migrations makes it
doubtful if they were even then known within the limits of what is
now Afghánistán, and they had certainly not penetrated into the
valley of Pesháwar or any part of the plains at the eastern foot of the
Sulaimán range.
This is virtually the conclusion arrived at by Mr. Longworth Damest
who observes that:-
« The first mention of the Afgháns in written history is in the
chronicle of al.'Otbi known as the Ta'rikh-i-Yamini (the author was
secretary to Mahmúd of Ghazni), and an almost contemporary mention
by al-Bírúní; Al-Idrísí in his account of Kábul and Qandahár (end of
11th and beginning of 12th centuries) does not even mention them.
Al-'Otbi records that Sebuk-tegín enrolled Afgháns in his army, and
that Mahmúd in his invasion of Tokháristán led an army consisting of
Indians, Kbalj, Afgháns and Ghaznawis, and that on another occasion
he attacked and punished the Afgháns. Baibaki's Chronicle, only a
little later in date, confirms this. Mahmúd's attacks on the Afgháns
took place in 411 (1020-1021) and 414 (1023-1024). Al-Bírání
mentions the Afgháns once (ed. Sachau, i. 208), sayiug that in the
western mountains of India live various tribes of Afgháns who extend
to the neighbourhood of the Sind (i.e., Indus) valley. Thus in the
11th century when the Afgháns are first mentioned they are found
occupying the Sulaimán Mountains now occupied by their descendants,
the very tribes which the advocates of the exclusive claims of
the Durránís will not admit to be true Afgháns. Al-Bírúní no doubt
also alludes to them in the passage (loc. cit., p. 199) where he says
that rebellious, savage races, tribes of Hindus, or akin to them, inhabit
the mountains which form the frontier of India towards the west.
There is no record that at this time any Afgháns were found west of
Ghaznín nor in the Kábul valley and Gandhára which was occupied by
a Hindu kingdom. Confusion has arisen through the error of modern
historians who have, as Raverty has pointed out, mistaken Tájik Ghoris
and Turkish Khalj for Afgháns. Raverty considers with good ground
tbat the Afgbáns were at this time found only in the mountains south
of the Kurram and east of Ghaznín. The most persistent mistake is
that regarding the Ghoris. Thus Malleson (History of Afghánistán,
p. 93) speaks of Qutb Al-Dín Ghori Afghán, where Ferishta, who is bis
authority, does not use the word Afghán at all, but calls him Ghorí
Súrí, i.e. a descendant of Súrí, and not a member of the Súr tribe of
Afgháns. Even so accurate a writer as E. G. Browne (Lit. Hist. of
Persia, ii, . 305) speaks of the “kings of Ghur, those fierce and hardy
Afgháns of Firúz-kúh." It is evident that throughout the Ghaznawí.
period the Afgháns continued to be an obscure mountain race. We
occasionally hear of them, but as adventurers and hill rebels only.
In 431 (1039-1040)' Mas'ud sent his son Amír into the hill c.)untry -
near Ghaznín to subdue the rebel Afgháns. (Malleson, loc. cit., p. 86
turns this into Afgháns, Abdális and Ghalzais, the two latter names
* See Raverty, op. cit., p. 86, note. He says: “In 414 H. (A, D, 1024) Mabmud came
an accommodation, in a distant part of Hind, with Beda (or Nanda in other works) ..
after which he returned to Ghazni and in the same year made a raid into the moun ain
inhabited by the Afghánián, plundered them and carried off much booty."
† Encyclopaedia of Islam, s. v. Afghánistán.



212
Dames on Pathán Éistory.
being absolutely unknown at that time). In 512 (1118-1119) an
army composed of Arabs, Ajam, Afgháns and Khalj, was assembled by
Arslan Shah. In 547 (1152-1153), Alfí says, Babrám Shah assembled
an army of Afgháns and Khalj. With the rise of the Ghorí power
the same state of things continues. In 588 (1192) according to
Ferishta the arıny assembled by Muizz-al-dín Muhammad bin Sam
consisted of Turks, Tájiks and Afgháns, and his Indian opponent
Pithorai (Prithwi Rájá) assembled a force of Rajput and Afghán
horsemen. Thus in this great war between Mussulmans and Hindus
Afgháns are represented as fighting on both sides, which probably
indicates that they were not yet completely converted to Islám,
although the manufactured legends represent them as having been
converted from the days of Khalid. It is not clear whence Ferishta
obtained this statement. It does not appear in the account of this
war given by Minháj-i-Siraj in the Tabagát-z-Násiri. This author does
not mention the Afgháns throughout his account of the Ghaznawi and
Ghori kings. His first and only mention of them is in his own time
in the year 658 (1260) in the reign of Násir-al-din Malimúd of Delhi.
He there says that Ulugh Khán employed 3,000 brave Afgháns in
subduing the hill-tribes of Mewat in Rajpútána. During the next
two centuries we find occasional mention of Afgháns in Indian history.
For instance in the reign of Muhammad bin 'l'ughlaq, Baraní says in
the Tarikh-i-F'iroz-Sháhi that there was a rebellion at Multán of a
body of Afgháns headed by Multán Mall (this name means in the
Muliáni dialect “ the champion of Multán," and is probably not the
proper name of an Afghán). Again Makh Afghán was one of the
foreign amirs who rebelled at Deogir. In 1778. (1376-1377) the fief
of Bihár was given to Malik Bir Afghán (Tarikh-i-Mubárik-Sháhi).
The amir Timur found them still hill robbers, and in the Malfúzat-z.
Tim úri, the Zafar-náma and the Matla'-al-sadain it is related that he
ravaged the country of the Awgháni (or Agháni) who inhabited the
Sulaimán Mountains. Thus except as occasional soldiers of fortune they
l'emained a fierce race of mountain robbers until the rise to power in
India of one of these adventurers made them famous. There can be
no doubt that the collapse of the Delhi monarchy after Timur's
invasion gave them their opportunity. This leader was Daulat Khán
Lodí who was faujdár of the Doáb in 808 (1405) and many other
Lüdís are alluded to as holding important posts. He rose to be one
of the most importart persons in the empire, and held Delhi for
some time against Khizr Khan and is by some classed as one of
the kings, but never took the title of Sultán. He surrendered
to Khizr Khan in 817 (1416) and died in confinement soon after.
Under the succeeding kings another Lodí Sultán Shah, alias Islám
Khán, rose to power and his nephew Bahlol first became governor
of the Panjáb, and in 855 (1450) he dethroned the last of the feeble
Sayyid kings and became Sultan of Delhi. He was succeeded by bis
son Sikandar wbo was followed by Ibrahim, but the Lodí rule, at first
vigorous, had failed to revive the moribund sultanate of Delhi which
fell before Bábar in 932 (1525). The Afgháns, who had become
numerous and powerful in India, succeeded, however, in driving out
the Mogbals for a few years, and founded another Afghán dynasty
under the brilliant leadership of Sher Shah Súr. The Súr clan were
near connections of the Lodís, both being branches of the Gbalzai stock.



Pathán elements.
218
ent soft Bajaur, Swát and bears, and manescendants are found
Many families of the Prángi and Súr clans settled in India at this
period, indeed they seem to have inigrated bodily, and, at the same time,
the related Niází and Lohání clans moved down from the mountains
into the Indus valley. In the preceding century the Yusufzais, a
branch of the great Sarbaní family of Afgháns (to which the Durranís
belong) had moved from the neighbourhood of Kábul, where they had
been settled for some time into the Peshawar valley and the mountain
tract of Bajaur, Swát and Buver. They gave the valley the name of
Yusufzai which it still bears, and many of them are believed to have
accompanied Bábar into India. Their descendants are found scattered
over Hindustan. The names of the Prangís and Súrs are not now
found, and they have probably merged in the Lodís. These settlers
were generally known in the Ganges valley by the name of Rohela
or Rohilla (from the Western Panjabi word roh, a mountain, rohela,
mountaineer), and have given their name to the province of Rohilkhand.
At the present day the Afrídí, Orakzai, Bangash, Tarín and Bárakzai
are strongly represented there. A population of over 100,000 in the
United Provinces of Hindustán is classed as Ghorſ, and this probably
includes the descendants of the miscellaneous followers of the Ghori
kings, whether Tájik, Turk or Afghán. There are many Kákars also,
both in the United Provinces and Punjab. The Zamand tribe settled
in Multáp and Kasúr in the Punjab and a large number of Abdális,
drived from Qandahár by the Ghalzais in the early part of the 18th
century, joined them at Multán. From these sources spring the Multáni
and Kasúriya Pathans. The Afgháns thus colonized northern India
largely, and their descendants there are still distinguishable, although
greatly assimilated by the surrounding population. They have lost
their language and tribal organization.
In their own country the Afghána never succeeded in establishing an
independent rule until the 18th century. They remained, like the rest
of the country, nominally subject to the powerful rulers of the day:
the Mughals, the Timúris, the Mughal emperors of India, or the Safawí
kings of Persia, until the rise of the Ghalzais to power under Mír
Wais, and afterwards of the Abdális (Durránis) under Ahmed Shah.
It was at this period, when the Afgháns became the ruling race over a
large population, that the name of Afghánistán was extended to the
whole country, including a large part of what had till then been known
as Khorásán, a name still in popular use for the plateau country above
the Sulaimán Mountains."
Ethnic origins. .
It is as difficult to unravel the racial elements of the Afgháns as it is
to obtain a trustworthy estimate of their numbers. At a Census such
tribes as Tanáoli, Jadún, Dilázák, Tájik, Khetrán, and even Mughals
return themselves as Patháns. And as the late Col. Wace wrote:
• The tribes in the west and north-west of the Punjab, who, during the last three centuries,
were frequently raided upon by Afgháns, got into the habit of inventing histories of Afghán
origin as a protection against ill-treatment; " and even where this motive was absent, the
general tendency to claim kinship with the dominant race would produce the same effect.
Moreover the origin of some of the tribes on the Pesháwar frontier is doubtful, and their
affiliation, with the Patháns incomplete, and thus they would set up a claim to be Pathán
which the true Pathán would indignantly repudiate. Mr. S S. Thorburn noticed the many
and bitter disputes caused by the preparation of the genealogical trees during the Bannu
Settlement, and the attempts made by Ját clans to be recorded as Patháns. He wrote:
• A low-caste man born and brought up in a Pathán country, if serving away from his



214
Ibbetson on Pathán origins.
home, invariably affixes Kháp to his name and dubs himself Pathán. It goes down if he
can talk Pashto, and his honour proportionally goes up.' Still the great mass of those
returned in our Censuses as Patháns are probably really so, and the figures represent very
fairly the general distribution of the race."
We may now turn to the late Sir Denzil Ibbetson's account of the
Pathán nation and, though we may regret that he accepted Dr. Bellew's
theories, we shall still find that his views were based upon a singularly
penetrating insight into the heterogeneous elements in the race.
He wrote:
There is great conflict of opinion concerning both the constitution and origin of the
Pathán nation. Not a few deny that there is any distinction whatever between the original
Afgháu and Pathán stocks, though these are for the most part officers of our frontier who are
not brought into contact with the original Afgháps. I have, however, been obliged to adopt
some one theory of the constitution of the nation as a basis for my classification of tribes;
and I have therefore adopted that of Dr. Bellew, who probably has a greater knowledge of
the Afgháns of Afghánistán as distinct from the Punjáb frontier, and especially of tbe old
histories of the nation, than any other of the authorities who have treated of the matter.
The constitution and early history of the nation according to Dr. Bellew's account are
discussed in the paragraphs presently following. But whatever the origin of the Afgháns
and Pathans proper may be, the pation to which the two names are now applied indifferent-
ly in Persian and Pashto respectively, occupying as it does the mountain country lying
between the Persian empire on the west, the Indian on the east, the Mongol on the north,
and the Baloch on the south, includes as at present constituted many tribes of very diverse
origin.' They are without exception Musalmáns, and for the most part bigoted followers of
the Sunni sect, hating and persecuting Shías, or as they call them Ráfazis,*
Constitution of the Pathán nation.-The words Pathán and Afghán are used indifferently
by the natives of India to designate the nation under discussion.t But the two words aro
not used as synonyms by the people themselves. The original Afgháns are a race of pro-
bably Jewish or Arab extraction; and they, together with a tribe of Indian origin with
which they have long been blended, still distinguish themselves as the true Afgháns, or since
the rise of Ahmad Shah Durráni as Durranis, and class all non-Durráni Pashto speakers
as Opra. But they have lately given their name to Afghánistán, the country formerly
known as Khorásán, over which they have now held sway for more than a century, and
which is bounded on the north by the Oxus, on the south by Balochistán, on the east by the
middle course of the Indus, and on the west by the Persian desert; and, just as the English
and Scotch who early in the 17th century settled among and intermarried with the Irish
are now called Irish, though still a very distinct section of the population, so all inhabitants
of Afghánistán are now in common parlance known as Afghán, the races thus included being
the Afghán proper, the Pathán proper, the Ghilzai, the Tajik, and the Hazára, besides tribes
of less importance living on the confines of the country.
The true Patháns are apparently of Indian origin. Their language is called Pashto or
Pakhto and they call themselves Pukhtanas or Pakhto speakersand it is this word of
which Pathán is the Indian corruption. They held in the early centuries of our æra the
whole of the Safed Koh and Northern Sulaimán systems, from the Indus to the Helmand
and from the sources of the Swát river and Jalálábád to Peshîn and Quetta. The Afgháns
and Ghilzais spead into their country and adopted their language and customs; and just
as Irisb, Scotch, and Welsh speaking the English language are commonly called English.
men, so all who speak the Pakhto tongue came to be included under the name Pathán.
Thus the Afgháns and Ghilzais are Patháns by virtue of their language, though not of
Pathán origin; the Tájiks and Hazáras, who have retained their Persian speech, are not
Patháns; while all five are Afgháns by virtue of location, though only one of them is of
Afghán race.
* There are several Shía clans among the Orakzai of Tiráh on the Kohát border. The
people of the Sámilzai tapah of the Kohát district, which is conterminous with the territory
of these clans, are also Shias. All own allegiance to the Shía Sayyids of the Orakzai Tiráh:
while everywhere many of the tribes which claim Sayyid origin are Sbías,
t In Hindustan they are often called Rohillas or Highlanders, from Rohi the mountain
country of the Patháns (roh=koh, a mountain).
$ Either from Durr.z-daurán "pearl of the age" or from durr-i-daurán "pearl of pearls."
The title was adopted by Ahmad Shah Abdáli when he ascended the throne, in allusion to
the Abdáli custom of wearing a pearl stud in the right ear.
$ Dr. Bellew and Major James identified them with the Pactiyans of Herodotus, and seem-
ed half inclined to connect them with tbe Picts of Britain, as also the Scyths with the Scots,
and certain Pathán and Brahui tribes with Cambrians and Ligurians!



Ibbetson on Pathán origins.
216
Origin of the Pathán.--The Afgháns proper claim descent from Saul the first Jewish king,
and there is a formidable array of weighty authority in favour of their Semitic origin. The
question of their descent is discussed and authorities quoted in Chapter VI of the Pesháwar
Settlement Report, and in Dr. Bellew's Races of Afghánistáns.* Mr. Thorburn quoted in
support of their Jewish extraction, “some peculiar customs obtaining among the tribes of
purest blood, for instance, the Passover. Jike practice of sacrificing an animal and smearing
the doorway with its blood in order to avert calamity, the offering up of sacrifices, the
stoning to death of blasphemers, the periodical distribution of land, and so forth ;” and he
points out that most of the learned men who reject the tradition of Jewish descent have no
personal acquaintance with the Afghán people. The Afghán proper is said still to call
himself indifferently Bani-Afghán or Bani-Isráil to distinguish himself from the Pathán
proper who is of Indian, and the Ghilzai who is probably of mixed Turkish and Persian
extraction.
Early history of the Afgháns.--The origin and early history of the various tribes which
compose the Afghán pation are much disputed by authorities of weight who hold very
different views. I have in the following sketch followed the account given by Dr. Bellew,
as it affords a convenient framework on which to base a description of those tribes. But
it is said to be doubtful whether the distinction which he so strongly insists upon between
Pathán proper and Afghán proper really exists or is recognised by the people; while the
Jewish origin of any portion of the nation is most uncertain. But the division of the
pation into tribes, the internal affinities of those tribes, and the general account of their
wanderings are all beyond question; and the theories which account for them are only
accepted by me to serve as connecting links which shall bind them into a consecutive story,
The traditions of the true Afgháns who trace their name and descent from Afghána, the
son of Jeremiah, the son of Saul, and Solomon's commander-in-chief and the builder of his
temple, say that they were carried away from Syria by Nebuchadnezzar and planted as
colonists in Media and Persia. Thence they emigrated eastwards into the mountains of
Ghor and the modern Hazára country. The Afgháns early embraced the creed of Islám,
to which they were converted by a small body of their tribe on their return from Arabia,
where they had fought for Mahomet under their leader Kais. . It is from this Kais or
Kish, namesake of Saul's father, who married a daughter of Khalíd-ibn-Wálid a Qureshi
Arab and Muhammad's first apostle to the Afgháns, that the modern genealogists trace the
descent alike of Patháns, Afgháns, and Ghilzai, or at any rate of such tribes of these races
as we have here to deal with ; and to him they say that the Prophet, pleased with his
eminent services, gave the title of Pathán, the Syrian words for rudder, and bade him
direct his people in the true path. Meanwhile, about the 5th and 6th century of our æra,
an irruption of Scythic tribes from beyond the Hindu Kush into the Indus valley drove a
colony of the Buddhist Gandhári, the Gandari of Herodotus and one of the four great
divisions of that Pactyan nation which is now represented by the Patháns proper, from
their homes in the Peshawar valley north of the Kábul river and in the hills circling it to the
north; and they emigrated en masse to a kindred people on the banks of the Helmand,
where they established themselves and founded the city which they named Gandhar after
their native capital, and which is now called Qandahár.
It is not certain when the Afgháns of Ghor moved down into the Qandahár country where
the Gandhári colony was settled; but they probably came as conquerors with the Arab
invaders of the 1st century of the Mahomedan æra. They soon settled: as the dominant
race in their new homes, intermarried with and converted the Gandhári, and adopted their
language ; anıl in course of time the two races became fused together into one nation under
the name of Afgháns, as distinguished from the neighbouring Pathans of whom I shall
presently speak, though the original stock of Ghor still called themselves Bani Israil to:
mark the fact that their origin was distinct from that of their Gandhári kinsmen. It is
probable that this tradition of Jewish origin was little more distinct than is the similar
tradition of Norman descent which some of our English_families still preserve. Thus the
Afghán proper includes, firstly the original Afgháns of Jewish race whose principal tribes
are the Tarin, Abdáli or Durráni and Shirani, and secondly the descendants of the fugitive
Gandhári, who include the Yusufzai, Mohmand and other tribes of Pesháwar. These latter
returned about the first half of the 15ih century of our æra to their original seat in the
Peshawar valley which they had left nearly ten centuries before ; while the original Afgháns
remained in Qandahár, where in the middle of the 18th century they made themselves rulers
of the country since known as Afghánistán, and shortly afterwards movej their capital to
Kábul. The tribes that returned to the Peshawar country were given by Ahmad Shah the
* Dr. Bellew suggested that the original Afgháns were the Solymi of Herodotus, and were
Qureshi Arabs who lived in Syria and there became intermingled with the Jews, or who
migrated to Ghor where the fugitive Jews took refuge with them. This supposition would
explain the name Sulaimani which is often applied to the Afgháns, and their own assertion
that Khalid ibn Wálid the Qureshi was of the same stock with themselves.



216
Dames on Pathán origins.
title of Bar or "upper" Durráni, to distinguish them from the Abdáli Durráni who re-
mained a. Qandahár.
I have said that the Gandhári were one of the four great divisions of the Pactivæ of
Herodotus. The other three nations included under that name were the Aparyice or Afrídi, *
the Satragyddæ or Khatak, and the Dadicæ or Dádi, all alike of Indian origin. At the
beginning of the Muhammadan æra the Afridi held all the country of the Safed Koh, the
Satragyddæ held the Sulaimán range and the northern part of the plains between it and
the Indus, while the Dádi held modern Sewestán and the country between the Qandahár
province and the Sulaimáns. These three nations constitute the nucleus of the Patháns
proper. But around this nucleus have collected many tribes of foreign origin, such as the
Scythic Kákar, the Rájput Waziri, and the many tribes of Turk extraction included in the
Karládri section who came in with Sabuktagin and Taimur;t and these foreigrers have so
encroached upon the original territories of the Pactyan nation that the Khatak and Afridi
now hold but a small portion of the countries which they once occupied, while the Dádi
have been practically absorbed by their Kákar invaders. The whole have now become
blended into one nation by long association and intermarriage, the invaders have adopted
the Pakhto-language, and all alike have accepted Islám and have invented traditions of com.
mon descent which express their present state of association. The Afridi were nominally
converted to Islám by Mahmúd of Ghazni ; but the real conversion of the Pathán tribes
dates from the time of Shaháb-ul-din Ghori, when Arab apostles with the title of Sayyid
and Indian converts who were called Shaikh spread through the country, and settled among,
married with, and converted the Patháns. The descendants of these böly men still preserve
distinct tribal identity, and as a ruie claim Sayyid origin.
The Ghilzai are a race probably of Turkish origin, their name being another form of
Khitali the Turkish word for 'swords man,' who early settled, perhaps as mercenaries
rather than as a corporate tribe, in the Siáh-band range of the Ghor mountains wbere they
received a large admixture of Persian blood. The official spelling of the name is still
Ghaleji at Kábul and Qandahár. They first rose into notice in the time of Mahmud Ghaz.
nawi when they accompanied in his invasions of India. Not long afterwards they conquered
the tract between Jalálábád and Kelát-i-Ghilzai, and spread east and west over the country
they now hold. In the beginning of the 18th century they revolted against their Persian
rulers, established themselves under Mír Wais as independent rulers at Qandahar, and
overran Persia. But a quarter of a century later they were reduced by Nádir Sháh, and
their rule disappeared, to be succeeded not long after by that of the Durráni.
With the remaining races of the „Tájik and Hazára which form part of the Pathán nation
in its widest sense, we have little concern in the Punjáb. The former are the remnants of
the old Persian inhabitants of Afghánistán, and the word is now loosely used to express
all Patháns who speak Persian and are neither true Afgháns, Sayyids, nor Hazáras. They
are scattered through Afghánistán, Persia, and Turkistán, in which last they hold some
hill fastnesses in independent sovereignty. The Hazáras are Tartar by origin, and are
supposed to have accompanied Chengiz Khán in his invasion. They occupy all the moun.
tain country formed by the western extensions of the Hindu Kush between Ghazni, Balkh,
Hirát and Qandahár. I have included in my account of the Patháns a few allied races,
who, though not usually acknowledged as Pathans, have by long association become closely
assimilated with them in manners, customs, and character. They chiefly occupy Hazára,
and are called Dilazak, Swati, Jadun, Tanaoli and Shilmani
With reference to the foregoing excerpts from Sir Denzil Ibbetson's
classic report Mr. Longworth Dames' pertinent observations are best
quoted in extenso and almost verbatim. He observes that modern
writers have attempted to distinguish between Afghán and Pathan, and
aver that only the Durránis and some tribes akin to them are entitled
to be styled Afghán, while the name Pathán (an Indian corruption of
the native form Pakhtáną or Pashtána, pl. of Pakhtún, Pashtún)
includes all tribes, whatever their origin, which speak the Pashto
language. This distinction, however appears to be a modern invention.
Pashtún or Pakhtún is undoubtedly the true national name and it is
universally used, while the word Afghán seems to be of literary origin
and like many other national appellations was first applied to this.
people by foreigners, and in modern times it has been adopted as a
M
ME
* The Afridi still call themselves Aparídi. There is no f in Pashto proper.
+ The various accounts given of Karlán's origin all recognise the fact that he was not a
Pathán by birth; and even the affiliation of the Karlapri is doubtful, some classing them as
Sarbini and not Gburghushti,



Dames on Pathán origins.
217
polite designation by educated persons and those who are proud of
their descent. The theory restricting it to the Durránis and their
kindred tribes first appears in Bellew's works and it has been accepted
by other writers without sufficient reason. According to this theory
great tribes like the Ghilzai may be called Pathan, but not Afghán, and
this applied also to the Afrídí, Bangash, Khatak, Wazíri, Kákas,
Gandápur, Sheráni, Ustaráni and many others without any sufficient
justification. Bellew accepted the tradition of the Hebrew origin of
the Patbáns and supposed them to have come into the Kandahár
province from the west, and there to have met the Indian colony from
Gandhára (the present district of Peshawar), which had been driven
thither by Scythian in vaders in the 5th or 6th century A. D. From
these Indians they are supposed to have acquired the Pashto language,
regardless of the fact that Gandhára was purely Indian and the language
spoken there a form of Prâkrit and not an Iranian idiom from which
Pashto could be derived. The Afghán settlement of the Yusufrais dates
only from the 15th century. Bellew supposes without a particle of
evidence that they were orly returning to their original home. The
name Qandahár he supposes to be identical with Gandhára, and to have
been carried to the Arghandáb valley by these colonists. It may be
noted here that Qandahár is historically a modern place and we hear
nothing of it before the 14th century. The Ghalzais are identified by
Bellew and others with the Turkish tribe which he calls the Khilichi,
i. e. the Khalj. Darmesteter (Chants des Afghans, p. clxiii) supports
this view, and it may be admitted that the Ghalzais have probably
absorbed a good deal of Turkish blood, although the actual identification
of names is doubtful. The tribes of the Sulaimán Range are supposed
by Bellew to be aboriginal Indians and he follows Lassen in identifying
them with the Paktues, who are stated by Herodotus to have occupied
Paktuike on the Indus. Among the other identifications made are those
of the Afridi (or Aprídai) with the Aparutai of Herodotus, and the
Khattak with the Sattagudai. Of these the first is primâ facie correct,
although it is by no means certain that the Aparutai occupied the
country of the modern Afridis. That of the Khattak with the Sattagudai
cannot be accepted. The game given by Herodotus appears. as
Thatagush in the Achaemenian inscription of Behistun, and the initial
sigma of the Greek form evidently corresponds to this Th, and could
not represent a guttural as in Khattak. The identity of Paktues,
Paktuike with Pashtun, Pakhtun (mentioned above as first advocated
by Lassen) has been more recently supported by Trumpp and Grierson
but is considered very doubtful by Spiegel and Geiger. Grierson
considers the connection between the Persian pusht, pushta (back,
mountain), Vedic paktha, the Paktues of Herodotas), and the Parsuotai
of Ptolenay very probable. Darmesteter considers the latter form the.
most likely to be near the original, and thinks that the Paktues of
Herodotus may stand for some form like Parshtyes. It must be
remembered that in the modern language the form with sh is older than
that with kh. It seems improbable therefore that a form like Paktaike
(which we know only through the Greek) could give rise to a modern
Pash or Pakht. Raverty thought that Paktuike might be represented
by the town of Pakhli* on the Upper Indus and this is not impossible
presenta Pashita notre rechten by his periodontology and the formet e
* Its name is probably derived from Sultán Pakhad. See under Shilmáni.



218
Dames on Pathán origins.
considering how frequently an ancient dental passes into ¿ in Pashtu.
But the tracts round Pakhli were not conquered by Pathans till the
17th century, when the Swátis drove the Turks out of it.
The combination rs, rs', in Avesta or Sanskrit frequently becomes sh
in modern Iranian languages. Thus the Pers. pusht Pashto pushti
represent Avesta parsti, Sanskrit prstha; Pashto kshal = Av. Kere's ;
Pashto push-tedal, Persian purs-idan = Av, pares, etc. Parsuétai or
Parshtyes therefore may well be represented by Pasht-Pukht. The
Parsuétai are mentioned by Ptolemy among the five tribes comprised
under the head of Paropenisadai (the others being the Bohitai, Aristopha-
loi, Parisoi, and Ambautai), who occupied the southern and Eastern
slopes of the Hindú-kush. A native tradition derives the came from
pushta, a moontain, and very possibly the original form from which
Parsuétai was taken may have borne the weaning of “highlander.”
The form Pathán certainly came into use in India, though it is now
used to some extent in Afghánistán, and in Balochistán it takes the ...
form Pathan, with the accent on the first syllable. Grierson finds a
form Paithan in use in the-East Gangetic valley to denote a Muham-
madan Rajput, not an Afghán. This name Paithan (from the Sanskrit
pratisthana) is also the name of two well-known towns. It seems
possible that some such vernacular term may have influenced the form
taken by the Indian adaptation of Pashtána as Pathán.
The name Pathán first appears among the writers of the 16th century
and Ni'mat Alláh fods an imaginary derivation for it in the name
Pațán said to have been bestowed by the Prophet upon Qais Abd-ul-
Rashíd. The word is said to mean the keel of a ship, in what language
is not specified, as it is not Arabic. .
The name Afghán was used much earlier, and is the only name
applied to the race by the older chroniclers from the 5th to the 10th
centuries of the Hijra (i1th to 15th A. D.). It was originally suggested
by Lassen, and again by Crooke that the origin of the name may be
looked for in the Assakánoi or Assakënoi of Arriao (Astakánoi of
Strabo), and the Aspasioi of the same writer (the Hippasioi of Strabo),
and that these names are identical with the Ashwaka of the Mahabharata,
who are associated with the Gandhára (vi, S 351). It seems that the
identification of Ashwaka with Assakánoi may be justified as a Prákrit
form and Aspasioi inight be the Iranian 'equivalent and Hippasioi &
Greek version (as Skr. ashwa= Av. aspa = Gr. hippos), but the modern
Dame Afgbán cannot be deduced from it, as the combination sw, sp, om
never gives rise to a modern por f, but rather to sh, 58 or sp in North
India and Afghánistán (see Grierson), Pisaca languages, pp. 293, 319).
This origin is on these grounds rejected by Grierson, also by Darmesteter
(Chants des Afghans, pp. clxiv, clvi). Bellew's suggestion of an
Armenian origin (aghwan) has met with no supp:rt. It may therefore
be stated that no satisfactory origin of the name Afghán (often pro.
nounced Awghán or Aogbán) has yet been found. : :
The theory of Hebrew descent of the Afgháns, especially of the
Durránis, wbo, as stated above, are assumed to be the only true Afgháns,
which many modern writers such as Bellew, Yule, Holdich and to some
extent Raverty have advocated, is of purely literary origin and may be
traced back to the Makhzan-2-Afgháni compiled for Kbán Jahán Lodi



219
Ibbetson's description of the Patháns.
in the reign of the emperor Japángír, and does not seem to have been
recorded before the end of the 16th century. It is an example of the
widely spread practice among the Musalman races of Persia, India and
Afghánistán of putting forward a genealogy claiming connection with
the family of the Prophet or descent from some personage mentioned
in the Korán or other sacred books. Thus the Baloch claim descent
from Mir Hemza, the Dáúd-potras and Kalhoras from Abbás, etc., and
the chroniclers, anxious to glorify the Afgháns, who had risen in the
world and become the ruling race under the Lodis and Surs, found an
ancestor in Malik Tálút or King Saul. This legend is paralleled by
another which firishta (p. 17, Lucknow text) quotes from the Matla'
al-anwar, to the effect that the Afgháns were descended from certain
nobles of the Court of Fir'awn (Pharaoh), who refused to accept Islám
when preached to them by Moses, and emigrated to the Sulaiman
Mountains. There is absolutely no historical evidence in support of
either form of the tradition ; both forms were unknown to the early
chroniclers.
Whatever the real origin of the Patháns may be the true Afghá-
nistán or country of the Afgháns only extends from Kasigbar*
to the boundary of the Qandahár province as constituted under
the Safawiya dynasty, as the Tazkirát-ul-Julúk defines it. In
this sense the term is used, according to Raverty, by the earlier
Muhammadan chroniclers. The great range of the Sulaiman hills,
between Qandahár and the Deraját and extending from the Khaibar
and Jalálábad on the north to Síwí and Dadar on the south, a distance
of some 300 kuroht or kos, or nearly 610 miles, is the earliest traditional
seat of the Afgháns, and more especially is the Kasighar regarded as
the cradle of the race. The breadth of this territory with its offshoots
is about 100 kuroh. Ibbetson thus described its people :-
Description of the Patháns. The true Pathán is perhaps the most barbaric of all the
races with which we are brought into contact in the Punjab. His life is uot so primitive
as that of the gipsy tribes. But he is bloodthirsty, cruel, and vindictive in the highest
degree; he does not know what truth or faith is, insomuch that the saying Afghán be imán
hus passed into a proverb among his neighbours; and though he is not without courage
of a sort and is often curiously reckless of his life, he would scorn to face an enemy whom
he could stab from behind, or to meet him on equal terms if it were possible to take advan-
tage of him, however meanly. It is easy to convict him out of his own mouth; here are
some of his proverbs: “A Pathán's enmity smoulders like a dung-fire."-"A cousin's
tooth breaks upon a cousin,"_" Keep a cousin poor, but use him."-"When he is little, play
with him: wher, he is grown up he is a cousio ; fight him.”_"Speak good words to an
enemy very softly : gradually destroy him root and branch."! At the same time he has his
code of honour which he observes strictly, and which he quotes with pride under the name of
Pakhtúnwali. It imposes upon him three chief obligations, nanawatai or the right of asylum,
which compels him to shelter and protect even an enemy who comes as a suppliant; badal or
the necessity to revenge by retaliation; and melmastia or open-handed hospitality to all who
may demand it. And of these three perhaps the last is greatest. And there is a sort of charm
* Kasi. or Kashi-ghar or Shuwal is the name given by the Afgháns to the Takht-i.
Sulaimán, a lofty peak of the Koh-i-Suleimán or Koh-i-Syáh on whose summit is the place of
pilgrimage known to the Afgháns as the ziarát of Sulaimán.
* Raverty defines the kuroh as the third part of a farsakh of 12,000 gaz (or league of
12,000 yards). He makes : 1 gaz= 32 angusht or fingers' breadth, or 1 gaz=24 fingers'
breadth=6 fists or the band with the fingers doubled up, each angusht=6 barley corns and
each barley corp=6 hairs from the mane of Turki horse or a camel's tail. The karoh aver.
ages somewhat less than 2 miles. The karoh is also termed gau kos-ie., the distance at
wbich a cow's lowing can be heard at midnight on a calm night.
. | The Pashto word tartur is used indifferently for "cousin” or for "eremy'; and
tarl uruali either for "cousiphcod" or for “enmity."



220
Dames' description of the Pathans.
about him, especially about the leading men, which almost makes one forgot his trg..
cherous nature. As the proverb says "The Pathán is one moment a saint, and the next
a devil." For centuries he has been, on our frontier at least, subject to no man. He leads &
wild, free, active life in the rugged fastnesses of his mountains ; and there is an air of
masculine independence about him which is refreshing in a country like India. He is a
bigot of the most fanatical type, exceedingly proud, and extraordinarily superstitious.
He is of stalwart make, and his features are often of a markedly Semitic type. His hair,
plentifully oiled, hangs long and straight to his shoulder ;* he wears a loose tunic, baggy
drawers, a sheet or blanket, sandals, and a sheepskin coat with its wool inside; his fav.
ourite colour is dark blue,f and his national arms the long heavy Afghán knife and the
matchlock or jazail. His women wear a loose shift, wide wrinkled drawers down to their
ankles, and a wrap over the head ; and are as a rule jealously secluded. Both sexes are
filthy in their persons.
Such is the Pathán in his home among the fastnesses of the frontier ranges. But the
Patháns of our territory have been much softened by our rule and by the agricultural life
of the plains, so that they look down upon the Patháns of the hills, and their proverbs
have it -"A bill man is no man," and again, ." Don't class hurrs as grass or a hill man as
a human being.” The nearer he is to the frontier the more closely the Pathán assimilates
to the original type; while on this side of the Indus, even in the riverain itself, there
is little or nothing, not even language, to distinguish him from his neighbours of the same
religion as himself. The Pathans are extraordinarily jealous of female honour, and most
of the blood feuds for which they are so famous originate in quarrels about women. As
a race they strictly seclude their females, but the poorer tribes and the poorer members
of all tribes are prevented from doing so by their poverty. Among the tribes of our terri.
tory a woman's nose is cut off if she be detected in adultery; and it is a favourite joke to
induce a Pathán woman to unveil by saying to her suddenly, “You have no nose!" The
Pathán pretends to be purely endogamous and beyond the border he probably is so; while
even in British Territory the first wife will generally be a Pathan, except among the poorest
classes. At the same timre Pathan women are beyond the Indus seldom, if ever, married to
any but Patháns. They intermarry very closely, avoiding only the prohibited degrees of
Islám. Their rules of inheritance are tribal and not Muhammadan, and tend to keep pro.
perty within the agnatic society, though some few of the more educated families have lately
begun to follow the Musalmán law. Their social customs differ much from tribe to tribe,
or rather perhaps from the wilder to the more civilised sections of the nation. The
Pathans beyond and upon our frontier live in fortified villages, to which are attached stone
towers in commanding positions which serve as watch-towers and places of refuge for
the inhabitants. Small raids from the hills into the plains below are still common; and
beyond the Indus the people, even in British Territory, seldom sleep far from the walls of
the village.
The Pathans are the dominant race throughout the whole tract west of the Indus as far
south as the southern border of the tahsil of Dera Ismail Khán, which roughly divides the
Pathán from the Baloch. East of the Indus they hold much of the Chach country of Hazara
and Ráwalpindi, they have considerable colonies along the left bank of the Indus till it
finally leaves the Salt-range, and they hold the northern portion of the Bhakkar thal. Be.
sides those tracts which are territorially held by Patháns, there are numerous Patháp
colonies scattered about the Punjab, most of them descendants of men who rose to power
during the Pathán dynasties of Dehli, and received grants of land revenue which their
children often increased at the expense of their neighbours during the turmoil of the 18th
century.
Mr. Longworth Dames writes :-" Physically the Afghán race belong
in the main to the Turko-Iranian type with a considerable admixture
of Indian blood among the eastern tribes. There is great variation
of type, and the absence of anthroponietrical observations over the
greater part of Afghánistán renders certainty unattainable at present.
It may be considered as established, however, that the proportion of
brachycephalic heads is larger than among the Indo-Aryans of the
Punjab, and probably larger than among the pure Persians. Among
the southern tribes such as the Kákars of Zhob and the Taríns and
Achakzais of Pishín and Chaman the type resembles that of the Baloch
* This is not true of the northern Patháns, wbo sbave their heads, and often their beard
also.
† The colour and cut of the clothes vary greatly with the tribe.



Pathán tribal organisation.
221
with broad heads, while, among the tribes of the Indus valley, heads are
narrower. Figures are wanting for the great central body of Durránis
and Ghilzais. Noses are generally long and often curved and this is
perhaps the origin of the idea which some have entertained that the
Afgháns are of Hebrew origin. Ujfalvy has noted that this peculiarity
is very marked in the portraits of the Kughan kings on the coins of the
1st century (A. 1.) and it is certainly not confined to the Afgháns but
widely spread among other races of the country as well as among the
Biloch and in the North-western Punjab and Kashmir. The Afgbáns
are a tall and well-built race, often fair in coinplexion in comparison
with their neighbours, brown beards and even blue eyes being occa-
sionally seen, but in these points there is great variation even in
neighbouring tribes."
Tribal organisation of the Patháns. The tribe is probably far more homogeneous in its
constitution among the Patháns than among the Baloch. Sayyid, Turk, aná other clans
have occasionally been affiliated to it; but as a rule people of foreiga descent preserve their
tribal individuality, becoming merely associated, and not intermingled, with the tribes
among wbom they have settled. Even then they generally claim Pathán origin on the
female side, and the tribe is usually descended in theory at least from a common ancestor.
The hamsáya custom by which strangers are protected by the tribe with which they dwell,
is in full force among the Patháns as among the Baloch. But with the former, though it
does protect in many cases families of one tribe who have settled with another, it seldom
accounts for any considerable portion of the tribe; and its action is chiefly confined to
traders, menials, and other dependants of foreign extraction, who are protected by but not
received into the tribe. Thus a blacksmith living in an Utmánzai village will give his clan
as Utmánzai ; but his caste will of course remair. Lohár. The nation is divided genealogi.
cally into a few great sections which have no corporate existence, and the tribe is now the
practical unit, though the common name and tradition of common descent are still carefully
preserved in the memory of the people. Each section of a tribe, however small, has its
leading man, who is known as Malik, a specially Pathán title. In many, but by no means
in all tribes, there is a Khán Khel or Chief House, usually the eldest branch of the tribe,
whose Malik is known as Khán, and acts as chief of the whole tribe. But he is seldom
more than their leader in war and their agent in dealings with others; he possesses
influence rather than power; and the real authority rests with the jirgah, a democratic
council composed of all the Maliks. The tribe is split up into numerous clans, and these
again into septs. The tribe, clan, and sept are alike distinguished by patronymics formed
from the name of the common ancestor by the addition of the word zai or khel, zai being the
corruption of the Pashto zoe meaning "son," while khel is an Arabic word meaning an
association or company. Both terms are used indifferently for both the larger and smaller
divisions * The stock of names being limited, the nomenclature is exceediugly puzzling,
certain names recurring in very different tribes in the most maddening manner. Moreover,
the title which genealogical accuracy would allot to a tribe or clan is often very different
from that by which it is known for practical purposes, the people having preferred to be
called by the name of a junior ancestor who had acquired local renown. The frontier tribe,
whether within or beyond our border, has almost without exception a very distinct corporate
existence, each tribe and within the tribe each clan occupying a clearly defined tract of
country, though they are in the Indus Valley often the owners merely rather than the
occupiers of the country, the land and smaller villages being largely in the hands of a mixed
population of Hindu origin who cultivate subject to the superior rights of the Patháns.
These people are included by the Patháns under the generic and semi-contemptuous namo
of Hindki; a term very analogous to the Ját of the Baloch frontier, and which includes all
Mahomedans who, being of Hindu origin, have been converted to Islám in comparatively
rocent times.t
“ The genealogies recorded in the Makhzan-z-Afgháni," writes Mr.
Longworth Dames. “ are the foundation of those found in more modern
works such as the Hayat-i-Afgháni. In their later parts they are
AN
* When our ill-fatod Resident Major Cavagnari was living at Kábul under the Amir
Yákúb Khán, those who favoured the British were known as Cavagnarizai, and the national
party as Yákúbzai. The ending zai is never used by the Afrídi.
+ The Dilazák are often called Hindkis by the true Patháns, as having come from India,
and not from Afghánistán,



222
Pathán genealogies.
historical, in the earlier they are valuable only as a guide to beliefs
entertained 300 years ago as to the relationship between the tribes.
According to these almost all Afgháns are descended from Qais 'Abdal
Rashid, who was converted to Islám through the intervention of the
victorious Khalid, and who was himself descended from Afghána, son of
Irmiya, son of Malík Tálútor Sárúl (Saul). He is supposed to have
derived his name from Kais (Kish), the father of Saul. From Kais
'Abdul-Rasbíd the alleged descent is as follows:
Kais 'Abd-ul-Rashid.
Sarban.
Batan. . Ghurghusht
These three sons are the eponymic founders of the three main
branches of the Afghán race, the Sarbanís, Batanis, and Ghurghushrís.
Sarban had two suns, Sharkhbún and Kharshbún, and from them we
find that a large number of the most important tribes claim descent.
Thus from Sharķhbún we have
Sharkhbún.
Tarin.
Sheráni
(by a Kákar wife),
ancestor of the
Sherání, Jalwání,
Haripál, Bá bar and
Ustarána tribes.
Miyána, 'Barech,
Urmur
ancestor of the ancestor of the (an adopted son),
Miyána tribe. Barech of Bhora- ancestor of the
wak,
Urmuris of
Kániguram and
Logbar.
Tor (black), ancestor Spin (white), ancestor
of the Tor Tarins. of the Spin Tarins
and Zaimukht.
Audal, ancestor of the
Abdális or Durranis.
From Kharshbún we have
Kharshbún.
Kand.
Jamand or Zamand,
ancestor of the
Muhammadzai. Kasúriya
of Kasúr.
Kasi, ancestor of the
Shinwari tribe.
Muh
Ghori or Gbúra, ancestor of Khakhai or Khashai, ancestor of
the Ghoriya-Khel, including the the Tarkláni, Gugiáni, Mandan
Mahmand, Khalil, Dá ádzai
and Yusufzai tribes.
and Chamkanni tribes,
Returning to the second main branch, the Batanis, we have
Batan.
Ismail,
Warspun. Kajin.
(The two branches of the bacanis;.
Mato, daughter,
Sháh Hussain Ghori
Mati tribe.
(no descendants).
Ghalzai tribe.
Kbarotis ) doubtful.
Sarwoni
(Qow broken up).
Súr.
Lohani,
Násirs 39



Pathán genealogies.
223
From the Loháni stook the present Daulat Khel, Míán Khel, Niazi,
Marwat, Khasur and Tator tribes are derived. It will be seen that the
only tribe claiming to belong to the Batani section in the male line is
the small Batani tribe, while the great Ghalzai tribe, almost a nation
in itself, and the numerous Lodís and Lohánis are believed to descend
only from Batan's daughter, by her marriage with Shah Husain, a de-
scendant of the Chori kings. This probably means that a large Tájik
or Ghori element is to be found in these tribes. The legend of the
illicit connection between Shah Husain and Bibi Mato, afterwards
sanctioned by her father, and the birth of a son named Gbalzoe (thief's
son), no doubt conceals the adoption of some such element as Afghán.
It has been thought by some that the Khalj Turks are the tribe thus
absorbed, and that the name Ghalzai is simply Khalji. This is very
doubtful, but it is probable that there is a Turkish as well as a Tájik
element in the tribe.
means tihe les matter thiet's
The Ghurghushti branch is also not very widespread.
is :
The pedigree
Ghurghusht.
Danai.
Babai
Mandú
mixed with Durráni. Mandu-Khel of Zhob.
Naghar tribe.
Pani
Kakar
The Kakar tribe.
The Gadán tribe of the
upper Indus are by some
connected with the Kákars,
but this seems improbable.
Dawai
The Pani tribe contain. mixed with the
ing the Panis of Síbí, Kakar.
Músá-Khel Isot,
Zmarai or Mzarai,
Dephal and
others.
There remains a group of tribes which are jointly as Karfáni or
Karláni supposed to be descended from Karşán or Karlán, whuse origin
is disputed :-
Karfan.
Kodai.
Kakhai,
Wardak )
Dilazak
tribes.
Orakzai
Mangal
Afridi
Khatak
Jadrátu
tribes.
Utmán Khel i
Khugiáni j
Tájí, Túri; and probably
the Shitaḥ which includes
the Dáwaris and Bannúchis,
and the Khost wáls.
According to Raverty the Karláni Patháds were not only of disputed
descent, but also unorthodox. They were, generally, disciples of the
Pir-i-Roshan, particularly those of Bangash, who even up to the pre-
sent day, either openly or secretly, continue to follow his doctrines,



224
Karláni genealogies.
though probably with some modifications. As regards the question.
Who were the Karlánis ? Raverty records several traditions ;
1st tradition
Yahuda.
Rani Makhzúm
Walid.
Khalid.
Kais-i•'Abd-ur-Rashid, the Pathán, married Sarah.
Safaban,
Sharaf-ud-din.
Amar-ud-din or Amár Din.
Aormar.
Zakariah.
Abdulla
adopted Karlánai.
2nd tradition
Sharf-ud-din, Sharkabun.
Aormar
Miana.
Amar Din,
Tarin.
adopted Karláni, by descent a Saraban.
Miana
3rd (the Khatak) tradition
Honai – brother of Urmur.
Karlanai,
4th (the Dilazak) tradition-
The Khalifah Ali.
The Imam Husain.
Sayyid Ja'far.i-Sádik,
Ismail.
Khátim.
Rijal,
Káb.
karláni.
Ismáíl.
Sayyid K4ín (? Khátim).
Rijal.
Káb.
Omar.
Ghur.
Muhammad Gísú-Daraz, of the long lock's
6th tradition
Wardag.
Honai.



225
Pathán observances.
Briefly, Raverty's theory appears to be this :-
. Two persons of Urmur's family found a child of the family of Ismáíl,
the descendant of Ali, and adopted it. It was named Karlani, 'be
of the iron vessel,' and several myths have arisen to explain why he
was so named.
The story goes that Abdulla was childless while Zakaria had a large
family and was indigent. One day they found a deserted camp and
Abdulla found a karhái or shallow iron cooking-vessel, wbile Zakaria
found a boy newly born. They exchanged their finds and Abdulla
adopted the foundling whom he named Karlárnai* (from karha) and
married to a girl of his own family. The legend probably means that
the Karlárnai are not of pure descent but descendants of Pathán woman.
The Khatak version, however, makes Karlárnai son of Honai, a brother
of Urmar. As a babe Karlárnai got left behind in the march and Urmar
went to look for him. He brought him back in a cooking pot and adopt-
ed him. But Honai was not Urmar's brother, he was like Wardag, a
son of the Sayyid Muhammad Gísu-daráz by a Karlárnai wife, according
to the Khatak account, but they appear to confuse this Bonai with the
son of Sayyid Qáb of the Dilázáks.
These genealogies look like a mythological way of saying that the
descendants of Urmur, i. e. the fire worshippers, adopted the Ismailian
doctrines.
In addition to these the great Wazir tribe, divided into Mahsud,
and Darwesh Khel, and the tribes of Dáwar are separate, and are not
incladed in any of the genealogies.
Certain sections of tribes claim to be Sayyids by origin. Such are
found among the Sheránis, Kákars, Karráni, Dowai, Tarín, Miána and
Batani. The Gandápur and Ushtarána tribes also claim this descent ;
they were originally sections of the Sheránis but are now separate
tribes. The Bangash claim to be Quraish by origin.
All these tribes were recognized as Afgháns in the Makhzan.j.
Afgháni with the exception of the Bangash and Wazírs and the Kar-
lánis of the Kakhai branch including the Afridis and Khataks, and
the tribes of the Kurram valley and Khost, the Utmán Khel with the
Jájís and Túris and the Jadráns, as well as the tribes of Dawar and
Bannu. These were probably unknown to the author as they lived in
obscure and inaccessible mountains. His omission of these tribes
must have been due to ignorance, as he mentions other tribes such as
the Farmúlis only to reject the idea of their being Afgháng.
Social Observances.
The social custom and observances of the Pathans are, within certain
limits, very variable, but they do not appear to be either strictly tribal
or consistently local. The following notest Jo not profess to be a com.
* Another version makes Karlárnai a Saſabarn by blood and Urmar's adopted brother.
Urmar's father one day went out hunting with his brothers Mianai and Tarin and found the
child. The essežtial features that Karlárnai was a foundling and adopted into Urmar's
family are the same in both versious.
+ In cases of difficult confinement, the midwife brings water to the husband, who wasbes
his hands and feet. Then this water is drunk by the mother, and the confinement is facili.
tated.
If the after birth does not come away, they bring the hustepd a (lump i) of wood (nclai)



226
Pathán observances.
plete account of them but are given here as typical, if incomplete,
examples of local and tribal usage.
Birth customs.-In Dera Ghazi Khan after 8 months of pregnancy
female relatives visit the expectant mother, the midwife puts her hand
on the woman's abdomen and a feast is given to all the assembled
women. Among the Jáfir Patháns on the completion of the 8th month
boiled grain, called ghungni, is distributed among all the women of the
brotherhood through the midwife, and she in returo gets something
from each house. This ceremony is called kanji.
In cases of difficult cor.finement water is brought from some pious
elderly man, who recites over it the words dam karta hai, and given to
the mother to drink with a view to facilitate delivery. *
In parts of Bannu outside the Marwat if it rains during a confinement
and there is thunder, a fire is kept burning and a pewter plate beaten so
that the thunder may not be audible to the lying-in woman. It
is believed that the woman risks catching a disease called gazak,
which is fatal. All the deaths that occur during confinement are be-
lieved to be due to gazak. If the mother suffers any inconvenience
during delivery, the midwife gives her a cup of water in which the
right toe of her husband or his beard has been washed. This dimin-
ishes the pains. On the birth of a boy the midwife congratulates the
child's relations and gets Re. 1 from each of them in return. If the
father or relations be at a distance information is sent to them through
a barber or Dúm. Ha congratulates them and gets a lungi or some
cash from each of thom. Whatever the sex of the child, the bang is
recited immediately after its birth. . The mullán gets Re. 1 on the
birth of a boy and supplies a paper on which charms have been written
to guard against demoniacal influences. This paper is fastened to a
stick placed towards the child's head. An iron instrument is also
placed near it. If the mother carries the child to any place she takes
with her this iron instrument as well as the paper. Ġhutti in this dis.
trict is administered in different ways. It is sometimes given by the
midwife herself and at others by the oldest and inost respected matron
of the family. The mother is given a bath (weham) after seven days.
This is considered to be the first marriage of the child. The nearer
female relations are each given a dopatta on this occasion. After bath-
ing the mother puts on now clothes and uses a charpoy to sleep on.
For these days she is given white zira, ghi and jaggery to eat.
The child is wrapped in a cloth and tied to a string. In Pashtu this is
styled sajnai. After the expiry of 40 days (chhila) the mother purifies
herself and takes a bath, the jhand of the child being also performed.
On every Sunday during this period the child's thighs and belly are
made to bleed with the edge of a razor and in same cases this practice
is continued up to the age of twelve. In order to escape the evil eye
amulets are made in the form of a garland and suspended round its
neck. People also visit their Pirs after the expiry of 40 days.
No age is fixed for circumcision. This ceremony, too, is regarded as
a marriage. The poor are fed on this occasion and rejoicing and
which he bas to throw on the roof. So long as he does not hit the mark (? what mark) the
pains continue : once it is hit delivery ensues.-
(From Darmesteter's Chants populires des Afgháns, p. 257).



Pathán observances.
227
merriments of every kind prevail. In the afternoon all the relations
stand round the child who is seated on an earthen plate. Underneath
which a rupee, some wheat-flour and a little jaggery are placed. The
persons present on the occasion give wel to the barber, and sometimes
they give him a turban each. Circumcision is performed on Thursdays
and Mondays.
But in Marwat no particular ceremony is performed whether it be a
first or any subsequent pregnancy. The mother's head is kept towards
the north and her feet towards the south. Only near relations are
allowed to go near her at delivery. In Lakki town on the birth of a
boy women visit the mother to congratulate her and the child's father is
congratulated by the males of his brotherhood in the chauk or village
meeting place. In return he gives them each a small quantity of jag.
gery. In villages the people congratulate the child's parents three days
after the birth : some people also sacrifice a he-goat or a ram and distri-
bute its raw flesh among the brotherhood. A woman suffering from
athrah is not allowed to go near the mother. On the hirth of a girl
people offer no felicitations and no jaggery is distributed. The child is
wrapped in a white cloth called badhna in order that its limbs may be-
come straight. In villages a midwife is called a başi siáni, and she is
displeased if called a midwife. She gets a rupee on the birth of a boy
but only eight annas on that of a girl. She also gets her food for
seven days, but the relatives give her nothing as wel. On the seventh
day the mother is given a bath regardless of its being Friday, and so on.
Boiled grain called ghunganian is distributed by way of charity. Imme-
diately after the birth the midwife severs the child's navel-string with
a knife, and it is then buried by the mother in a pit dug for the pur-
pose. No name is given to the child for three days, but after that a
mullán is sent for to name it. The bang is recited in its right ear.
The custom of whispering the bang is extinct in rural villages and in
these the name is given to the child by the eldest representative of the
family, but when previous children have died in infancy the name is
given by the mullán, who get eight annas or a rupee for this service.
In some places Qurán is placed near the child and its mother for seven
or forty days. The knife with which the navel-string was severed is
kept turned towards the child's head.
The custom of ghutti is not found in the Marwat. The child is
given its mother's milk. But in one family in Maina Khel the child
is fed at the breast of a Kutáni or sweeper. When a woman is purified
she bathes on the 40th day. She also washes her old clothes herself,
and they are not given to the midwife. The custom of weham is not
known in Marwat. When the mother has bathed on the 40th day she
takes the child to her parent's house for a few days, and on her depar.
ture they give her bangles or bracelet worth 4 or 5 rupees as well as
a chola.
The jhand is removed on the 40th day or eight days later. The child
is shaved at home by a barber, and the hair is buried outside or thrown
away. Silver equal to it in weight is given away in charity. The
custom of aqiqa is extinct in Marwat, and no lock of hair kept on the
child's head. In cases where children bave died, if a vow has been
made a he-goat is sacrificed. The cbild's head is pressed by the mid.
wife for seven days so that it may grow round,
Our some place multing when theil deren have to dost representa
ays. pehong is placed right annasiod in interesentative owned in
en awagt hair kept has been



228
Pathán observances.
Circumcision is called sunnátán in Marwat. No age is fixed for this
ceremony. Some people circumcise the boy within seven days of his
birth, while others do it at any time before he attains bis majority.
Patháns do not sing songs on this occasion, but Játs and other tribes
make merry. The members of the brotherhood are feasted and tambol
is realised from them. The foreskin is buried at a place where pitchers
full of water are kept. Circumcision is effected by a barber, and he
gets a rupee or so from the child's parents. A boy born circumcised is
called Paighambar Sunnat, and is not circumcised a second time,
though in order to fulfil the behests of the Shar'a a very little piece is
cut off.
Among the Niázi Patháns of Mianwali tahsil, a marriage proposal
is generally made and accepted by the parents or other elder rela.
tions of the contracting parties. Sometimes a trusted friend or a
holy man is requested to conduct the negotiations. At betrotbal
some cash and clothes are given to the parents for the bride's use.
The money is converted into ornaments. When everything is ready
for the wedding, the parties mutually agree upon a date for its cele-
bration. Generally the bride's parents accept a present of money as a
help towards defraying its expenses, including the girl's ornaments
and clothes. Poor parents nowadays accept money as the price of
the girl. For seven or eight days before the wedding both bride and
bridegroo'n have to perform máiyán, during which time they enjoy
absolute immunity from work, and are fed sumptuously while their
bodies are rubbed with a sweet scented batna. When the biradari
and friends assemble at the bridegroom's house, they are feasted and
neondra is collected. This is a gift of money generally not exceeding
five rupees. A careful record of it is kept so that the same amount may
be given in return when a marriage is celebrated in the giver's family.
After this the janj or procession goes to the bride's house. It consists
of the biradari and friends. It is accompanied by the village menials ;
the dúms with dhol and sharna (a long flute) being prominent, and to
complete it camels as well as horses are almost indispensable as the
former carry the womenThe horsemen must perform tent-pegging
during the wedding and sometimes have to unearth a peg driven deep
in by villagers of some village in the way, who stop the procession and
will not let it pass until the-peg has been taken
The bridegroom is accompanied by a friend called sabála, and
the corners of their sheets are tied together. The sabála is always at
the bridegroom's elbow, to assist him in the part he has to play.
The procession is timed to arrive in the evening. When it nears the
village the dúms play and the women sing and on approaching the
brides's house the janj is opposed, clods being thrown at it and abuse
freely given. Ihis resistance may or may not become serious, it is en-
joyed just the same. Then a village menial, generally a Máchhi (a
woodcutter and baker), or a dúm appears and stops the jan; with a
rope etretched across the road and will not allow it to proceed until he
is paid a rupee or two. The procession then enter and is accommodated
and feasted. At bed-time or at dawn the nikáh is performed.*
* Among the Paikhels and the Tajakhels of Sawáns and Mochh the nikáh is performod
in the bridegroom's house on the return of the janj; but this custom is now declining and
it is considered derogatory to hand over a damsel without first performing the nikáho



Pathán observances.
229
After the nikáh the bridegroom has to don now clothes made
for him by his parents-in-law, and the bride does the same. At
night mehndi is applied and the bridegroom with his Sabála has
to play with the girls and women (sahelis) of the bride's party. The
toys used are generally made of kneaded wheat-flour and are caricatures
of members of both families. They cause an immense amount of mirth
and sometimes the bridegroom and his sabála receive severe blows.
from the merry damsels with whom they play. At the same time the
girls also try to test the physical strengths of the bridegroom, they
will, for instance, give him a heavy gharra (pitcher) full of sand and
bid him lifů it with his teeth. Among some clans the bridegroom has
to pick up his bride and carry her from one place to another, generally
a distance of 10 or 12 feet.* Woe be to the bridegroom who cannot do
so. While the toys are being played with, the bride is seated at a little
distance with her burga over her face but, of course, able to watch the
whole fun. When the game is over the bridegroom goes to salám his
mother-in-law : he touches her feet and presents a rupee, this coin is
sometimes presented to his sister-in-law. Next morning the dáj (or, the
bride's dowry) is shown to the assembled birádari. It comes from the
following sources :-
(1) Presentsi.e., ornaments, clothes, cooking utensils, beds, etc.,
from the parents.
(2) Presentsmi.e., ornaments, clothes, etc., from the paternal ro-
lations.
(3) Presentsi.e., ornaments, clothes, etc., from the maternal re-
lations.
(4) Presents--i.e., ornaments, clothes, etc., from such relations as are
connected by marriages alone.
(5) Presents from the friends of (1), (2), (3) and (4).
When the bride is fully attired and ornamented, the procession returns
with her. She rides on a horse either by herself, supported by some
other person, or else behind the bridegroom. The horse carrying her
leads the procession. Sometimes she is put in a kacháva on a camel.
Among Wattu Khel and Balo Khel Patháns the bride is put into a
blanket and its four corners are seized by four man who carry her
away. If the distance be great she is carried in this way for a few
paces and then put on a horse or a camel. At her departure it is
customary for the bride to weep aloud hoo-koo. On reaching the bride-
groom's house she should cling to the door and refuse to enter the room,
intil she is given some present, such as a coin, etc. She then stays
with the bridegroom for seven days; after which one of her brothers or
other male relations takes her back to her father's house. She is then
brought back by the bridegroom or his father.
These ceremonies are deeply rooted but nobody can tell their origin.
It is not certain whether the Patháps adopted them when they came in
contact with the Hindus of the country or brought them from their
own homes.
* This is a general custom in Hindustan.
† No body can tell what this custom means.



280
Pathán observances.
Pathán marriage customs in Hazára.- Among the Swátis the father
or brother or some other near relation of the youth goes to the girl's
parents. If they consent to her betrothal, then a jigga of five or six per-
sons, or a janj, goes to the house of the bride's parents but the bride-
groom does not accompany it. The nikáh is performed then.
If the girl is of age, two men go to her to obtain her concent to its cele-
bration but, if she is a minor, ber father gives his consent and the
bridegroom's father accepts the girl on his son's behalf. Some parents
exact large sums for their daughters and the money is paid at this
time. The dúm, nái and other menials are also paid small fees. The
mulla who performs the nikáh gets a rupee on his return home. The
bridegroom's parents send clothes and sweetmeats to the bride by a
dúm or nái. On the Id festivals also clothes are sent to the bride, but
this is not essential.
Before the actual wedding, a ceremony called frikan has to be per-
formed. The bridegroom's father goes to the girl's father taking with
him some people of his own village, or of the girl's village, to settle
how much rice and ghi and how many goats, etc., the girl's parents
demand for the entertainment of the janj and of the people of the
bride's own village. The day for the wedding is then fixed. The
marriage party is accompanied by the bridegroom. By the people of the
girl's village in the Pakhli plain of the Mansehra tahsil, no resist-
ance is offered to the jar, but in the Bhogarmong glen small stones
are thrown at it by young boys. In the Pakhli plain the janj is fed
both at night and in the morning by the bride's parents, but in Bho-
garmong it is fed in the morning by the people of the bride's village,
each house holds feeding one or more of its members. In the early
morning, the girls of the bride's village take the bridegroom's friend
to a spring or stream and make him cut the water thrice with his
sword. The women meanwhile abusing him. On their return to the
bride's village the nikâh is performed a second time but the first nikáh
at the betrothal, is also held to be valid.
Among the Gadúns the boy's parents send a nái to the girl's father
to enquire if he agrees to his daughter's betrothal. He says that he
will give a definite reply after consulting his friends. A few days later
the boy's sister, brother, or other relation goes to the girl's father. If
he consents to the betrothal, a man is sent to him to fix a day for its
solemnisation. In case it is agreed that the betrothal jirga is to be fed
by the girl's parents, this man takes with him also some rice, ghi, etc.,
which he gives to the girl's parents. On the day fixed, the boy's father
or brother with some five or ten other persons goes to the girl's house
at night. . After they have eaten, the nái or đúm of the girl's village
places thal or chauki before the boy's father, brother, uncle or
other relation who has come to arrange the betrothal. The nãi or
dúm says that a certain amount which he mentions, e. g., Rs. 100, 200,
300, or 400 may be put into the thál. He generally demands a sum
larger than what is to be paid by the boy's parents. The boy's father
then puts a certain sum in the thál. Some parents only take Rs. 5
out of this for the girl's sisters and other female relations and return the
rest to the boy's father. Others keep the whole amount, but when the
thál is taken they give back a few rupees to the boy's relations as pagri.
When the betrothal takes place among near relations the girl's parents



Pathán observances
281
accept whatever is put into the thál, but when the girl belongs to another
tribe then whatever is demanded by the girl's parents has to be paid.
After the thál has been removed, the dúm brings sharbat and mehndi.
The boy's nearest relation takes a little sharbat and dips the little
finger of his right hand into the mehndi. A rupee is put into each of
the vessels containing the sharbat and mehndi for thə đúm and nái of
the girl's house. The girl's father then says that he has betrothed
his daughter, whom he mentions by name, to the son of so and so. The
jirga then returns home. No nikáh is performed at the betrothal. If the
boy's and the girl's houses are both in the same village, the jirga returns
home the same night, otherwise they return next day, but the morning
food is not taken in the girl's house. Some parents do not undertake
to feed the jirga, in such cases no grain, etc., is given them, the jirga
take their food in their own homes.
When the girl attains puberty a nái er dúm is sent to the girl's
parents to fix the day. On the day fixed before starting for the
bride's house, the wedding party is fed by the boy's parents, not by the
girl's. The marriage party leaves for the bride's house in the day time
and also returns by day. No resistance is offered to it. The bride-
groom accompanies the marriage party. The nikáh is performed
in the bridegroom's house. No relations of the girl are present at
the nikáh. Her dower is fixed by the man authorized by her in this
behalf. She is taken back on the seventh, ninth, or eleventh day after
her marriage. If taken back on the seventh she is brought back to her
husband's house on the ninth, if on the ninth sbe is brought back to his
house on the eleventh. On the third day after the marriage the bride.
groom goes to the house of his father-in-law to salám and is given &
rupee and a pagri.
Among the Tanaulis a near relation of the boy, such as his father,
uncle, brother or maternal uncle, with some other persons, goes to the
girl's house to arrange the betrothal. If her parents agree to it, the
head of the jirga is given sharbat first and his companions after him.
The nikáh ceremony called Ijáb-kabúl is also performed. The nái and
đúm are each paid one rupee. Sometimes the jirga takes one or two
suits of clothes for the girl with them, but sometimes the clothes are
sent after the betrothal. For fixing the day of the marriage, the
boy's father, uncle or other relation goes to the house of the girl's
parents. If they demand anything for the wedding expenses such
as rice, wheat, ghi, gur, mehndi, etc., these are paid before the day for
it is fixed. The day for the wedding is usually Thursday or Friday.
The marriage party is fed by the girl's parents, but often at the expense
of the bridegroom's parents, but sometimes the foriner feed them at
their own expense. Neondra is also levied by the girl's parents from those
invited by them to the wedding similarly when the boy's parents feed
the men invited by them, they also levy neondra. The amount however
is not fixed. The nikih is performed in tbe girl's house. At the time
of the nikáh the money demanded by the girl's father is put into a thái
but the jirga usually reduces its amount. Resistance is very rarely
offered to the marriage party. The girl's parents give clothes to the
bridegroom's relations. The dower given to the bride by her parents
is shown to the people. Part of it is sent with her when she is taken



232
Pathanah-Pawinda.
foreighbourhood firogetpál, otherwise established ih were in the pine hil
away and part is given her when she returns to her parent's house.
The mulla who performs the nikáh is given one rupee.
PATHÁNAH, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
PAȚHÁNIA, the Rájput tribe to which the ruling family of Núrpur in Kángra
belonged. It took its name from Pathankot in Gurdáspur, “the
first possession which the family occupied on their emigration to this
neighbourhood from Hindustán.” Pathankot, formerly Paithan, with
Mau was held by Jetpál, otherwise Rána Bhet, who was not a Katoch
but a Túnwar from Delhi and who established himself there about 700
years ago.* The first acquisitions of the family were in the plains at
the bead of the Bári Doáb. They afterwards withdrew into the hills
and Núrpur, named after the empress Núr Jahán, became their capital.
For a history of the downfall of the dynasty see the Kángra Gazetteer,
1904.
PATHAR-PATORE, see Sarig.tarásh.
PATHERA, a brick-maker : Panjabi Dicty., 885.
Parohá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Moltán,
PATOHLI, -YÁ, PATOI, -IN, a stringer of pearls, a maker of silk fringe, or tape,
a worker in silk : Panjabi Dicty., p. 888
Paroi, a weaver.
PATOLKHEL, see under Hatikhel.
Paton, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
PATPHERA, Panjábi Dicty., 888,
Patra, a Hindu dancing girl.
PATRANG, -GGá, a silk-dyer; see Rangrez.
PATRE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Patwá, Silk-spinners, who also put silk cords into jewelry, and make silk
cords in general: Sanskrit patta sutra kása, silk-twister, mentioned
in the Tantras, wbich are ancient (Colebrooke's Essay, p. 275).
Pátlí, a weaver (Multáni), see Paoli.
PAUNGAR, a Ját clan (agrioultural) found in Anritsar.
PAWANIA, see Pániya.
PAWAR, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
PAWÁŘ, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
PAWINDA.-To the Ghilzai and Lodi, and especially to the former, belong
olmost all the tribes of warrior traders who are included ander the
* It is difficult to reconcile the above story with the Muhiál legend given on p. 133 supra.
For the derivation of Paithán from Pratisthána see the Arch. Survey Rep., 1904-5, p. 111:
also p. 206, supra.



Pawri-Perna.
233
term pawindah,* from parwindah, the Persian word for a bale of goods
or, perhaps more probably, from the same root as powäl, a Pashto word
for “ to graze." They are almost wholly engaged in the carrying trade
between India and Afghánistán and the Northern States of Central
Asia, a trade which is almost entirely in their hands. They assemble
every autumn in the plains east of Ghazni, with their families, flocks,
herds, and long strings of camels laden with the goods of Bukhára and
Kandahár; and forming enormous caravans numbering many thousands,
march in military order through the Kákar and Wazírai country
to the Gomal and Zhob passes through the Suleimáns. Entering the
Dera Ismail Khan district, they leave their families, flocks, and some
two-thirds of their fighting men in the great grazing grounds which
lie on either side of the Indus, and while some wander off in search of
employment, others pass on with their laden camels and merchandise
to Multán, Rájputápa, Lahore, Amritsar, Delhi, Cawnpore, Benares,
and even Patna. In the spring they again assemble, and return by
the same route to their homes in the hills about Ghazni and Kelát-i.
Ghilzai. When the hot weather begins the men, leaving their belong-
ings behind them, move off to Kandahár, Herát, and Bukhára with the
Indian and European merchandize which they bave brought from
Hindustán. In October they return and prepare to start once more
for India. But the extension of the Railway system is changing all the
conditions of the traffic.
The principal Pathán clans engaged in the Pawinda traffic are or were
the Muhani, the Muthi and Marbel clans and some of the Kundi clan of
the Niazi are also engaged in the trade, The Bahars, with their two sub.
divisions Anjir and Sanjar ; the Násir, Dotanni, Lúni, Panni, Bakhtiar
and Gandapur, with the Ghilzai Sulaimán Khel, Tarakki and Kharoti
and many others, are also engaged in the traffic.
Pawaí, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
PENJá, also called Pinjára (see under Qassái), Panjora, Panjwára, Púnji or
Pinjia, is a cotton-scutcher, who striking a bow with a heavy wooden
plectrum uses the vibrations of the bow to separate the fibres of the
cotton, to arrange them side by side, and to part them from dirt and
other impurities. He is often returned as Nadáf, Dhupiá, Panbakob,
Kaláf, Pumba, etc.
PERNA, fem. •í, a vagrant tribe of gipsies, exceedingly similar to the Nats
or Bázígars. But there is said to be this great distinction, that the
Perpas habitually and professedly prostitute their women, which the
Naţs do not.t It is believed that Pernas sometimes entice low-caste
women, who have no protectors, into joining their fraternity. The
Perna women are said to be jugglers and tumblers, and generally
perform their acrobatic feats holding a sword or knife to their throats
* These Pawindah tribes speak the soft or western Pashto, and have little connection with
the settled tribes of the same stock..
The Pawindahs are well described at pages 103ff of Dr. Bellew's Races of Afghánistán.
and at pages 18ff of Priestley's translation of the Haiyát-i-Afgháni, while Tucker gives much
detailed information concerning them at pages 1841 of his Settlement Report of Dera
Ismail Khán.
+ Other good authorities say the exact converse is the case. The Kanjars pride them.
selves on only prostituting their daughters, and on keeping their wives in even stricter
seclusion than many pardanashin families. Cf. Nácbi.



234
Phágar-Phaphra.
but their characteristic occupation is dancing and singing rather than
tumbling. The men apparently do not perform, but merely play the
drum for the women to dance to. It is not quite clear that the word
is anything more than the name of an occupation like Bázígar, for
some Pernas are said to be Chúhra by caste. It is possible that they
are a true caste, but like many of the vagrant tribes will admit
strangers to their fraternity on payment. They are almost all
Musalmáds, and are said to marry by nikáh. They are said to be
divided into two classes, bárátáli and teratáli, from the sort of music to
which they dance, tál meaning a "beat” in music. If so, the music
with thirteen beats in a bar must be worth listening to as a curiosity.
They are probably found almost all over the Punjab, but not on the
frontier.
PHÁgar, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Paage, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Phagpá, PHAKPÁ, “ The Holy," a term applied to the Buddbist religion
and to shrines and other objects held sacred by Buddhists. The word
therefore in our Census returns merely means that the person returning
it is a Buddhist.
PRAKíwár, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán..
PAALAR, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
PHALRON, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
PAALYON, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
PHÁN LERE, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
PRAPHRA, a small tribe of Ját status, occupying a compact area of about 25
square miles at the foot of the Salt Range, east of Pind Dádan Khan
in Jhelum ; and to this small block of 10 or 11 villages they are al-
most entirely confined. They were described by Mr. R. G. Thomson
as a "semi-Ját tribe," but have long claimed to be of Mughal descent,
and of course have no difficulty in producing a pedigree showing their
descent from Taimúr : the only other evidence adduced forward is a
sanad of a kárdár of Mughal times, conferring an assignment on the
headmen of Mauza Dhudhi, still one of their principal villages, in
which the grantees are referred to as “ Mughal zamindúr"; but ex-
amination shows the word Mughal to be a clumsy interpolation: and the
interpolator has also thought fit to alter the year from 1133 to 1033 H.,
overlooking the fact that the document bears a seal with the date
1133. The sanad thus proves no more than that the tribe was well
established in its present location in 1133 H., or 1720 A. D., and tends
to prove that in Mughal times they were considered to be zamindárs
not Mughals. For the rest, their Mughal origin is not admitted by
the surrounding tribes : and they intermarry with such tribes as the
Lillas, Gondals, Waraich, etc., who are almost certainly Játs. Their
claim must therefore be rejected, and they must be regarded as pro-
bably of Ját origin, though it shonld be added that in popular estima-
tion they rank somewhat above those who are admittedly Jáțs. They
state tbat they came to Jhelum from the direction of Faridkot, and
settled in that District as traders and agriculturists : the name of their



Wil therehe 15th cen tehodo partisi Phiph
Pharerb--Phoghát.
285
leader at that time is said by some to have been Phaphra, from whom.
the tribe derived its name, but by others Nittháran, some fifteen genera.
tions back according to the pedigree-table, while Phaphra is shown
nine generations earlier. In character, customs and physique they do
not seem to differ from the other minor agricultural tribes of Jhelum,
they are good farmers. The earlier part of the pedigree table now
produced by them is worthless; in these forming part of the earliest
settlement records the first fourteer generations are as follows: Har,
Bah or Shah Biraham, Tilookar, Shah, Mal, Phaphra, Pheru, Vatrá,
Jatrí, Hársh, or Araf, Tulla, Nádo, Har Deo, Máhpal, Nittháran: they
all trace their descent from Nittháran, who had fíve sons, Gharib,
Samman, Icbhran (whose son Sáu's descendants are found in Sáúwál),
Ráú, and Dhudhí. Sonie of the earlier names are clearly Hindu, the
common descent from Nittháran, whose date according to the tree
would be about the middle of the 15th century, is in favour of tho
account which makes him the first settler in those parts. The Phaphrá
are also found as an agricultural clan in Shahpur. Cf. Phiphra.
PHABERÁ, the name for a Hindu Rangsáz in Jullundur.
PAIPHRA, a Muhammadan Ját tribe, found in Gujrát. It claims Chaughattai
Mughal origin, and says that its eponym came from the south to
settle in Jhelum. Cf. Phaphra.
Parráí, PIRÁHIN, a devotee of Sakhi Sarwar. The Piráhin go about with a
drum, begging, and accompany pilgrims to the shrine in Dera Gházi
Khán. The great offering to Sakhi Sarwar is a rot or thick flat cake
of bread, which the Piráhin cook with ghi and sagar, divide part, and
eat the rest. But it is doubtful if the Pirábin are necessarily connected
with Sakhi Sarwar. They are essentially players on a dhol ; and they
also circumcise children. Drummers are always taken with pilgrims to
Sakbi Sarwar, but the Piráhin may be mainly or even solely employed
as a circumcisor. They are majáwars of his shrine at Kaithal, and
probably elsewhere, they may be of various castes, e.g., Mírási, Dogar,
and even Baloch. Phirai or Pirábin appears to be the Western Panjabi
form of BHARAI. It is said to mean'a drummer,' though the drum ia
called dhad, and it is most probably the same word as Pariah ir South-
ern India.
PHOGRÁT, a Ját tribe which possesses somo importance in Jínd, and hai,
spread into the neighbouring portions of Gurgaon and Rohtak. They
will not intermarry with the Deswál: but the reason is not explained.
They own twelve villages in the Dádri tahsil of Jínd. They claim
descent from a Chauhan Rájput of Ajmer who first settled in Sanwar, &
village in Dádri, but Mahi Bhallan, son of Sangat Rai, his descendant,
abandoned Sanwar and founded a village or "kahera,' whence he
expelled Kundu, Ját, and took possession of the twelve villages held by
him. The Kuudu Játs are now found in Jiud tahsil. The Phogát
derive their name from phog,* a plant (used as fodder for camels and
also eaten by people in the Bagar), which grew abundantly in the
village which was also named Phogát. The got worships its sidh Bábá
Shami Dyál, a Bairági faqír, whose shrine is at Dadri, on Bhadon badi
• The phog is the Rathor's pet shrub for some reason. It is of value as fuel. P. N.Q.
IV, 821,



238
Phor-Pohea.
8th. He inspired an ancestor of the tribe to build this shrine and
promised him his blessing. The got does not worship a jathera, but at
weddings the pair make offerings to the bhumia, the spot set aside in
memory of its ancestor who founded the village. The offerings are
taken by a Brahman.
HOR, (1) a synonym of DHátiwál, in Karnál : (2) a Ját clan (agricultural)
found in Multán. Cf. Porwál.
Paúlkíán, one of the four derás or militant orders of the Sikhs, and sometimes
described as the twelfth misl or confederacy.
PAULLARWAN, a sept of Suraj-bansi Rájpats found in Gujrát, claiming de-
scent from Rájá Karn through their eponym. They also hold 12
villages in Sialkot where they claim Súroa king of Delhi as their ances-
tor and say that they were once called Súroa, but Phúlorú, their
eponym, came from Delhi in the reign of Feroz Shah and settled at
Thirwán or Bhirwal in Jhang. Fifth in descent from him Bagah or
Tánga escaped the destruction which threatened the tribe and fled to his
grandmother. They intermarry with the Bhatti and Khokhar. They
are found as a Rájput and Pushkarna Ját clan, both agricultural, in
Montgomery.
FAULSAWÁL, a tribe of Játs, found in Nábha. They derive their descent
from Bechal, a famous warrior, whose four sons were sent in turn to
defend the gate (phulsa) of a fort, whence the name. They ordinarily
worship the goddess (sic) Bhairon, and perform the first tonsure of their
children at Durga's shrine in the Dahmi ilaqa of Alwar...
Pipa, or more politely Piling, is the term applied to the outsider' or menial
classes in Spiti as opposed to CHAJANG. It is also applied to Muham-
madans and Christians, and the pipa as a class find themselves excluded
from the church, as well as outcast from society, since they cannot
become monks; but they may run round a mani wall, turn a prayer-
wheel and listen to a service at a little distance from a chapel. Thus
they may acquire merit and even earn re-incarnation as nonos. Four
classes of menials are recognised :-
(i) the Shing khan or carpenter,
(i) the Gar(h)a or smith,
(iii) the Thag khan or weaver,
(iv) the BHBDA or musician.
Each craft is endogamous and marriage in a lower craft involves de-
gradation to its ranks and a carpenter is reluctant to entertain &
weaver.
Paráí, a drummer, i. q., Bharáí : Panjabi Dicty., p. 926. Reference is also
made to Parnáú, but that word is not given in the Dioty. Another and
commoner form is Piráhin, a non-descript kind of faqir who acts as &
circumcisor.
PIROKE, an impure sept of the Kharrals also called Chuhrora : see Jálahke.
It is also found as an agricultural olan in Montgomery.
POGAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Maltán.
POBÁDIYE, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
POJA, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.



Pokhwat-Pújak.
PokuwÁT, a tribo of Játs, found in Gurgaon.
POLANDAB, tribe found in Bahawalpur. The Láng claim to be one of
its four septs, the others being the Dalle, Lile and Kanjur. They
say they came from a far land with Sher Shah Sayyid Jalál.
PONAR, a Ját olan (agricoltural) found in Multán...
Poní, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Ponirá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
PONTAD, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Por, & Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
POBAWÁL, a synonym for the Her Játs.
Posla, a got or section of the Mírásis. In Sialkot they are attached to the
Jajja Jathol Játs..
POTE, a clan of Játs found irr Hosbiárpar. . .'
Peanu, according to Cust, a tribe of hillmen who descend each season from
the Jammu] hills, cultivate the land and return to their homes with
their portion of the produce in Gardáspur. The Prahus, however, are
not a tribe of hillmen, but immigrant tenants from the low hills and
Gujars from the Shakargarh tahsil,* and the correct form of the word
.. is upráhu, a tenant who tills one crop and then disappears. He is
called opra in the Bajwantt and in Kángra opáhui
PRANGI, said to be derived from práng, meaning leopard.' A branch of
the Lodi Pathans, descended from Prangai, son of Siánai, son of
Ibrahim Lodi. Like the Mabpál and Súr branches of the same tribe,
the Prárgi are generally known as Lodis, and have almost disap-
peared from the Afghán territories, having mostly taken service under
Afghán rulers in Hindustán and settled there.
PRíT-PÁLa, lit. 'fooder of the departed spirit. A Brahman selected on the
death of a Rájá. He is fed with khir (rice and milk), touched with
the band of the dead Rájá very shortly after his death and thence- .
forward entertained for a year with all the pomp and splendour of the
Rájá. All the articles used by the Rájá are given to him and it is
believed that through him the dead Rája's soul is nourished in its daily
journey to the higher regions which occupies a full lunar year. At
the end of the year the Prít-pála is supplied with clothes, money, etc.,
for life and expelled the state, never to re-enter it. Having been
excommunicated he cannot re-visit his home and must retire from the
world. In Bashahr he is styled Prith-pálu, and is regarded as of
similar status to the Achárj, but some of the latter refuse to marry
with him.ll
Pús, (1) a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery ; (2) a class of,
JAN priests.
PÚJAK, & worshippor.–Panjábi Dicty., p. 934.
Gurdaspur Gr., 1891-92, p. 3.
† Sialkot Sett. Rep., 1865, p. 98.:
| Kángra Sett. Rep. (Lyall), p. 8.
§ 800 Mandi Gazetteer, 1904, Appendix III, and cf. pp. 133.4 of Vol. I.
✓ Simla Hill States Gazetteer, 1910, Bashahr, p. 44,"



238
Pumba-Punnuni.
PUMBA, see PENJA.
PUNDIR, a Rájput tribe which would appear to belong to the Dahíma* royal
race of which Tod says :-"Seven centuries have swept away all
recollection of a tribe who once afforded one of the proudest themes
for the song of the bard.” They were the most powerful vassals of
the Chauhan of Delhi, and Pundir commanded the Lahore Frontier
under Pirthi Ráj. The original seat of the Punjab Pundir was
Thánesar and the Kurukshetr of Karnal and Ambala, with local
capitals at Púndri, Ramba,t Hábri, and Púndrak; but they were
dispossessed by the Chauhan under Rána Har Rái, and for the most
part fled beyond the Jumna. They are, however, still found in the
Indri pargana of Karnal and the adjoining portion of Ambála.
Pungar, see Rangrez.
Púni, a tribe of Játs : Panjábi Dicty., p. 936. .
Pónia, a Ját tribe of the Shibgotra bra ach descended from its eponym,
..:the eldest son of Bárh. They claim no Rájput origin but say they are
by origin Játs having been made so by the pun or favour of Mabadeo.
Another account derives their name from a title of Mabadeo. They
once held 360 villages in, or on the borders of, Bíkáner, and are now
found in Hissar and the adjacent parts of Rohtak, Jind (Dádri and
Sangrur tabsíls). and Pațiála.
PONI BANDO, a sept of Brahmans, clients of the Muhiál Brahmaps,
parohits they are, in Jhelum,
Punn, a tribe of Játs claiming Solar Rájput origin through Kájá Diram.
Found in Sialkot.
PONNUN. A Ját tribe, claiming. Solar Rájput ancestry. They are chiefly
found in Amritsar and Gurdaspur, but they also owo five villages in
Sialkot. They say that their ancestors came from Ghazni; or accord-
ing to another story, from Hindustán. In Amritsar they say their
first settlement was Arab Kot, but they do not know where it was.
According to the following pedigree they are akip to the Aulakh.
Raghu.
Ag.
Jastat.
Ram Chandar.
Lahu.
Parichhat.
Talochar.
Shah.
Achraj.
Dhanich.
Punnun.
Of Vol. I. p. 220. The Dahiya Kshatriyas recognise Dadhmati dovi, as thoir family
oddaca inst, as the Dáhíma Brabmans do. Hor temple is near Gotha and Manglod two
dillacea in Nagaur (Jodhpur State). As goddess o: tha Dahima Brahmans she is called Sri
Dadhimati Mataji. See Ind. Ant., 1912, pp. 87, 88.
The Karnal Gazetteer of 1890 has Churangar or Charni for Ramba and says it must
have beon a place of great importance as it lay in a great bend on the old bank of the
Inmna Hero the Pundir made their last stand against the Chanbán : 88 134, 144, ..



Punwar.
289
The Chharan, an offshoot of the Punnun, do not intermarry with
them, because the daughter of Chaudhri Rasúl was married to a
Sindhu. Her brother offended the Sindhús and this led to a foud in
which only the Sindhús and Punnuns of Sirbáli Kelán took partnot
the whole of the two tribes. The boy's descendants were known as
Cbhuţtan (discarded) and have now founded a new village. The
Punnuns founded Bárá Punnuán in Amritsar.
The Punnun are also found in Montgomery as a Hindu Ját clan
(agricultural).
They are found too in Ludhiána, where at weddings the bridegroom's
uncle or the elder brother cuts a jandi twig with an axe or sword.
The bride and bridegroom then play with the twigs, the bridegroom
first striking the bride with them and she afterwards doing the same to
him. The púja articles are given to a Brahman. The Punnun worship
Guru Rám Rái. The first milk of a cow or buffalo as well as ghi is
given on the 10th day to a Sikh, in the pame of the Guru, whose dera
is at Kíratpur. Previous to this not even chháchh may be given to a
Muhammadan.
Punwár, a Rájput tribe of the Western Plains. The Punwar or Pramara
was once the most important of all the Agnikula Rájputs. “The
world is the Pramara's ” is an ancient saying denoting their extensive
sway; and the Nau kot Márústhali, extending along and below the
Sutlej from the Indus almost to the Junna, signified the máru asthal
or arid territory occupied by them, and nine divisions of which it
consisted. But many centuries have passed since they were driven
from their possessions, and in 1826 they held in independent sway only
the small State of Dhát in the desert. The Punwar are found in
considerable numbers up the whole course of the Sutlej and along the
lower Indus, though in the Deraját and in the Multán division many
of them rank as Játs. They have also spread up the Beás into
Jullupdur, Gurdaspur and Sialkot. There is also a very large colony
of them in Rohtak and Hissar and on the conines of those districts;
indeed they once held the whole of the Rohtak, Dádri, and Gobána
country, and their quarrels with the Játu Túnwar of Hissár have been
noticed under JÁTU. A few Punwár are also found in the Pabbi in
Jhelum.
According to local tradition in Rohtak the Punwars immigrated
from Jilopattan or Daranágri and intermarried with the Chauhans
who gave them lands round Rohtak and Kálánaur. In Sialkot they
say that Rájá Vikrámajít was a Punwar and divide themselves into
four branches ; Bhautiál from Bhota, Mandíla from Mandiál. Saroli
from Siráli and Pinjauriá, from Pinjaur, * all names of placer.
In Baháwalpur the Punwárs bave the following 15 septs :-
i. Dhándú: mostly goat-herds who live by selling milk. A few hold land.
ii. Gachchal.
iii. Pahna-Rúe : a small sept.
iv. Rán : a small sept, mostly agriculturists, but in Ahmadpur East washermen.
V, vi, & vii. Jaipál, Kirára and Wáran.
* This cannot well be the Pinjaur near Kálka. All four.places appear to lie in Sialkot,



PúrahwákPushkarna.
RAI KHANGAR.
Rája Jag.doo.
Rája Mongra.
Báran or Wáran.
Jaipál.
Kiráru.
The Jaipáls and Kirárus originally came from Marwár, but the Wáran had their home
at Dhárá-nagri.
viii. Wasir : a small sept.
ix. Tangrá : also a small sept ; some are tenants and others are proprietors.
1. Satthus : tenants and cattle-breeders.
zi. Butt : chiefly found in Ahmadpur, but there are also a few in Khairpur
peshkári. They refuse to give daughters outside the sept and usually
intermarry.
xü. Lakk : chiefly found in the peshkári of Khairpur East.
xiü. Labána : the Muhanımadan Labánas claim to be Punwars from Delhi.
xiv. Parhar, divided into three sub-septs, (i) Dangar, (ii) Nachna, and (ii) Mabpa.
A branch of the Parbars, called Burárna, lives in the Rohi and tends
camels.
XV. Dhuddi : a widely spread clan found both in the Lamma and Ubha and com.
prising several sopts, of which the principal are :-
(i) Kadar.
(iii) Chanan. (v) Pannan.
(ü) Katári.
I (iv). Pakhiwár. 1 (vi) Wake.
To these may be added the Buhars,* who are akin to the Parbars, and the Dahás who
are dohtras or daughters' sons of the latter, Dahá, a faqir, having married the daughter of a
Parhar Rájput and founded this sept.
PúbahwÁL, a tribe of Játs which claims to be descended from Rái Púrah,
a Solar Rájput, and settled in the Nárowál pargana of Sialkot in
Akbar's reign.
PURBA, see under Hati Khel.
PURBERA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
PURERI, a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Púríwál, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
PUSHKARNA, a sub-caste of Brahmans who take their name from the
sacred lake of Pushkar or Pokhar near Ajmer. One section of them
is said to have been originally Beldárs or Ods who were raised to
Brahminical rank as a reward for excavating the tank. They still
worship the pickaxe. They are the hereditary Bráhmans of the Ráj.
putána Bháțias, and are more strict in caste matters than the Sársút.
They are found in some numbers in the western districts of the Punjab,
and in the town of Bawal in Jind there are a few Pusbkarnas, belong.
ing to the Sahwária sásan. They engage in no occupation save
priestly service in the temples to Puskharji and assert that they
had been specially created by Brahma to worship in his templos,
and hence they are so named; they do not associate with the Gauss
in any way, though the existence of sásans among them would indicate
a Gaoſ origin.
* For cortain Bobar or Bubar shrines see Pb. C. R. 1902, 8 58 on p. 157.



241
.
APPENDIX
The late Sir Denzil Ibbetson's account of the Afghán tribes is repro-
duoed here owing to its value for administrative purposes. It follows
the geographical location of the tribes from south to north.
Pathán tribes of Dera Ismail Khán.-The tribes of our lower frontier belong almost
exclusively to the lineage of Shaikh Baitan,* third son of Kais. His descendants in the
male lino are known as Bitanni, and are comparatively unimportant. But while, in the
early part of the 8th century, Baitan was living in his original home on the western slopes
of the Sikh-band range of the Ghor mountains, a prince of Persian origin flying before the
Arab invaders took refuge with him, and there seduced and married his daughter Bibi
Matto. From him are descended the Matti section of the nation, which embraces the
Ghilzai, Lodi, and Sarwáni Patháns. The Ghilzai were the most famous of all the Afghán
tribes till the rise of the Durráni power, while the Lodi section gave to Delhi the Lodi and
Sár dynasties. The Sarwáni never rose to prominence, and are now hardly known in
Afghánistán. To the Ghilzai and Lodi, and especially to the former, belong almost all the
tribes of warrior traders who are included under the term PAWINDAH, from parwindah, the
Persian word for a balé of goods or, perhaps more probably, from the same root as powal,
a Pashto word for "to graze.'t. They are almost wholly engaged in the carrying trade
between India and Afghánistán and the northern States of Central Asia, a trade which is
almost entirely in their hands. They assemble every autumn in the plains east of Ghazni,
with their families, flocks, herds, and long strings of camels laden with the gocds of Bu.
khára and Randahår; and forming enormous caravans numbering many thousands, morch
in military order through the Kákar and Wazir country to the Gomal and Zhob passes
through the Sulaimáns. Entering the Dera Ismail Khán district, they leave their families,
filocks, and some two-thirds of their fighting men in the great grazing grounds which lie
on either side of the Indus, and while some wander off in search of employment, otherg
pass on with their laden camels and merchandise to Multár, Rájputána, Lahore, Amritsar,
Delhi, Cawnpore, Benares, and even Patna. In the spring they again assemble, and return
. by the same route to their homes in the hill about Ghazni and Kelát-i.Ghilzai. When the
hot weather begins the men, leaving their belongings behind them, move off to Kandahár,
Herát and Bukhára with the Indian and European merchandise which they have brought
from Hindustan. In October they return and prepare to start once more for India. These
Pawindah 'tribos speak the soft or western Pashto, and have little connection with the
settled tribes of the same stock. I
It is not to be wondered at that these warlike tribes cast covetous eyes on the rich
plains of the Indus, held as they were by a peaceful Ját population. Early in the 13th
century, about the time of Shaháb-ud-dín. Ghori, the Prángi and Súr tribes of the Lodi
branch, with their kinsmen the Sarwani, settled in the northern part of the district immedi-
ately under the Sulaimáns, the Prangi and Súr holding. Tánk and Rori, while the Sarwáni
settled south of the Lúni in Drában and Chandwán. With them came the Bilúch, Khasor,
acd other tribes who occupied the branch of the Salt Range which runs along the
right bank of the river, and still hold their original location. In the early part of the
15th century the Niazi, another Lodi tribe, followed their kinsmen from Ghazni into
Tánk, where they lived quietly as Pawindahs for nearly a century, when they crossed the
trans-Indus Salt Range and settled in the country now held by the Marwat in the south
of the Bannu district, then almost uninhabited save by a sprinkling of pastoral Játs, where
Bábar mentions them as cultivators in 1505.
During the reign of the Lodi and Súr Sultáns of Delhi (1450 to 1555 A. D.) the Prangi
and Súr tribes from which these dynasties sprang, and their neighbours thé Niázi, seem
to have migrated almost bodily from Afghánistán into Hindustán, where the Niázi rose to
:
* Dr. Bellow points out that Baitan has an Indian sound; while Shekh is the title given,
in contradistinction to Sayyid, to Indian converts in Afghánistán. Thus the Ghilzai (the
Turk term for swordsman) are probably of Turk extraction, with Indian and Persian
admixtures..
† The pronunciation is Powindah, rather than Pawindah,
| The Pawindahs are well described at page 103 ff of Dr. Bellew's Races of Afghánistán,
and at pages 18 ff of Priestley's translation of the Haiyát-i-Afgháni, while Mr. Tucker
gives much detailed information concerning them at page 184 ff of his Settlement Report of
Dera Ismail Kbán,



242
Pathán tribes.
great power, one of their tribe being Súbahdár of Lahore. These last waxed insolent and
revolted in alliance with the Gakkhars, and in 1547 Sultán Salim Sháh Súri crushed the
rebellion, and with it the tribe. At any rate, when in the early days of Akbar's reign the
Loháni, another Lodí tribe, who had been expelled by the Sulaimán Khel Ghilzai from
their homes in Katawáz in the Ghazni mountains, crossed the Sulaimáns, the Lodi tribos
were too weak to resist them; and they expelled the remaining Prángi and Súr from Tánk,
killing many, while the remainder filed into Hindustan. The Loháni are divided into four
great tribes, the Marwat, Daulat Khel,* Mián Khel and Tátor.t About the beginning of
the 17th century the Daulat Khel quarrolled with the Marwats and Mián Khel and drove
them out of Tánk. The.Marwats moved northwards across the Salt Range and drove the
Niázi eastwards across the Kurram and Salt Range into Isa Khel.on the banks of the Indus,
where they found a mixed Awán and Ját population, expelled the former, and reduced the
latter to servitude. The Mián Khel passed southward across the Luni river and, with the
assistance of the Bakhtiár, a small Persian tribe of Ispahán origin who had become asso.
ciated with them in their nomad life, I drove the Sarwáni, already weakened by feuds
with the Súr, out of their country into Hindustán. In this quarrel the Daulat Khel were
assisted by the Gandapur, a Sayyid tribe of Ushtaráni stock (see next paragraph); and
the latter were settled by them at Rori and gradually spread over their present country.
The SAIRÁNI Afgháns had been settled from of old in the mountains about the Takht-i-
Sulaimán. They are by descent Sarbáni Afgháns; but their ancestor, having quarrelled
with his brothers, left them and joined the Kákar from whom his mother had come ; and
his descendants are now classed as Ghurghushti and pot as Sarbáni. About the time that
the Loháni came into the district, the BABAR, a Shiráni tribe, descended from the hills
into the plains below and subjugated the Ját and Baloch population. Finally, about a
century ago, the Ushtaráni proper, a Saiyad tribe affiliated to the Shiráni Afgháns, having
quarrelled with the Mosa Khel, acquired a good deal of the plain country below the hills
at the foot of which they still live, subjugating the Baloch inbabitants and encroaching
northwards upon the Babar. These are the most recently located of the trans-Indus tribes
of Dera Ismail Khán, Thus the Patháns hold a broad strip of the trans-Indus portion of
the district, running northwards from the border of the Khetrán and KASRÁNI Baloch (866
p. 480 of Vol. II) along the foot of the hills and including the western half of the plain
country between them and the Indus, and turning eastwards below the Salt Range to the
river. They also hold the trans-Indus Salt Range, and the Sulaimáns as far south as the
Baloch Border. But while in the extreme northern portion of the tract the population is
almost exclusively Pathán, the proportion lessens southwards, the Patháns holding only the
superior property in the land, which is cultivated by a subject population of Ját and Baloch.
East of the indus the Balúch who hold the north of the Bhakkar thal are the only Pathán
tribe of importance. Their head-quarters are at Paniala in the trans-Indus, Salt Range, and
they seem to have spread across the river below Mianwali, and then to have turned south.
wards down the left bank. Although living at a distance from the frontier, they still talk
Pashto and are fairly pure Patháns. The other Patháns of the Khasor hills, though trans-
Indus, are, like all the cis-Indus Patháns, so much intermixed with Játs as to have for.
gotten their native tongue. The Mián KABL and GANDAPUR were deprived of many of
their eastern villages in the beginning of this century by Nawáb Muhammad Khán Saddo-
zai, governor of Leiah.
The Pathán tribes of Dera Ismail Kháu continued.-I now proceed to give a brief do.
scription of the various tribes, beginning from the south :-
The USHTARANI. --The Ushtaráni proper are the descendants of Hannar, one of the song
of Ustaryani, a Saiyad who settled among and married into the Shiráni section of Afgháns ;
(Hannar ... Ushtaráni, and whose progeny are shown in the margin. They
Amarkbel
were settled with the Shiránis to the south of the
Ustaryani
Gandapur... Gandápur.
Takht-i-Sulaiman, and till about a century ago they
Marere
were wholly pastoral and pawindah. But a quarrel
(Shekhi
with their neighbours, the Músa Khol, put a stop to
their annual westward migration, and they were forced to take to agriculture. Their de-
scent into the plains has been described in section 400. They still own a large tract of hill
country, in which indeed most of them live, cultivating land immediately under the hills
and pasturing their flocks beyond the border. Their territory only includes the eastern
slopes of the Sulaimáns, the crest of the range being held by the Músa Khel and Zmari.
* The Daulat Khel is really only a clan of the Mámu Khel tribe; but it has become so
prominent as practically to absorb the other clans and to give its name to the whole tribe.
+ Wrongly spelt Játor throughout Mr. Tucker's Settlement Report.
* They are a section of the Bakhtiari of Persia. They first settled with the Shiráni
Afghans; and a section non lives at Margha in the Ghilzai country, and is engaged in the
pawindah trade, but has little or no connection with the Bakhtiar of Dera Ismail.



Pathán trübes.
243
They are divided into two main clans, the Ahmadzai or Amazai and the Gagalzai, and
theso again into numerous septs. They are a fine manly race, many of them are in our
army and police, and they are quiet and well behaved, cultivating largely with their own
hands. A few of them are still pawindahs. They are much harassed by the independent
Bozdár (Baloch). They are all Sunnis. The boundary between the Ushtaráni and Bábar
was originally the Ramak stream. But in a war between them the former drove the latter
back beyond the Shiran stream which now forms their common boundary:
The Bábak are a tribe of the Shișáni stock whose affinities have been described in the
preceding section, though they are now quite separate from the Shirani proper. They are
divided into two sections, one living wholly within our border, while the cther holds the
hill country opposite, but on the other side of the Sulaimáns. The two have now little
connection with each other. The Bábar of the plains hold some 180 square miles between
the Ushtaráni and Mián Khel, Chaudwán being their chief town; and include the Mahsúd
and Ghora Khel clans of the tribe. The result of their quarrels with the Ushtaráni has
just been mentioned, while their advent in the plains has been described above-see also
Vol. II, p. 31.
The Mián KHEL are a Loháni tribe whose coming to the district and subsequent move.
ments have already been described. They hold some 260 square miles of plain country
between the Gandápur and the Bábar. With them are associated the BAKHTJÁR (see above
also) who, though of Persian origin, now form one of their principal sections. The greater
number of them still engage in the trans-Indus trade; and they are the richest of all the
pawindaħ tribes, dealing in the more costly descriptions of merchandise. They are divided
by locality into the Draban and Músa Khel sections, the latter of which hold the south-
west quarter of their tract. They are a peaceable people with pleasant faces, and more
civilised than most of the pawindah tribes. They seldom take military service, and culti;
vate but little themselves, leaving the business of agriculture to their Ját tenants. They
have a hereditary Khán who has never possessed much power. -
The GANDAPUR.--The origin and the manner in which they obtained their present country
of the Gandápur have been described above; see also Vol. II, p. 277.
The BITANNI or BHITTANNI include all the descendants in the male line of Baitan, the
third son of Kais. They originally occupied the western slopes of the northern Sulaimáns :
but being hard pressed by the Ghilzai, moved, in the time of Bahlol Lodi, through the
Gomal Pass and occupied the eastern side of the north of the range, as far north on its junc.
tion with the Salt Range and as far west as Kaniguram. Some time after the Wazir drove
them back to beyond Garangi, while the Gurbuz contested with them the possession of
the Ghabbar mountain. They now hold the hills on the west border of Tánk and Bannid.
from the Ghabbar on the north to the Gomal valley on the south. In their disputes many
of the tribe left for Hindustán where their Lodi kinsmen occupied the throne of Delhi, and
the tribe has thus been much weakened. Shaikh Baitan had four sons. Tajín. Kaií.
Ismáíl and Warshpún. The tribe consists chiefly of the descendants of Kajín, with a few
of those of Warshpún. Ismáíl was adopted by Sarban, and his descendants still live with
the Sarbani Afgháns. Tbe Tajín branch is chiefly represented by the clans Dhanne and
Tatte, said to be descended from slaves of Tajín. A small Sayyid clan called Koti is affi.
liated to the Bitanni. Till some 80 years ago they lived wholly beyond our border; but
of late they have spread into the Tánk plains where they now form a large proportion of
the Pathán population, occupying some 550 square miles, chiefly south of the Takwára.
They also hold some land in the Bannu district at the mouth of the passes which lead up
into their hills. They are a rude people just emerging from barbarism, but keen-witted.
They are of medium weight, wiry, and active, and inveterate thieves and abettors of
thieves; and they have been called the jackals of the Wazírs. They have no comnion
chief. The proverbial wit of the country side thus expresses their stupidity and thrift-
lessness.-" The drum was beating in the plains and the Bitanui were dancing on the
hills ; " and "A hundred Bitanni eat a hundred sheep." At pp. 106—7 of Vol. II is re.
produced Tucker's account of this tribe which differs in some respects from the above.
The DAULAT KEL.-Tbe coming of this tribe to the district has already been described.
Their principal clan was the Katti Khel; and under their chief Katal Rhán the Daulat
Khel ruled Tánk and were numerous and powerful about the middle of the 18th century.
They accompanied the Durráni into Hindustán, and brought back much wealth. But since
that time the Bitanni and other tribes have encroached, and they are now small and feeble.
The Nawab of Tánk, the principal jágirdár of the district, is a Katti Khel.
The Tator have been mentioned above. They were very roughly treated by Nadir Shah.
and the Daulat Khel completed their ruin. They are now almost extinct. Their
two clans, the Bára Khel and Dari Kbel, hold a small area on the Tánk and Kulachi
frontier.



244
Pathán tribes.
Pawindah Border and other tribes.--The tribes not possessing sufficient importance to
merit detailed description are-
The Zarkanni, a small colony of Shaikhs, who settled some 500 years ago in a corner
between the Gandápur and Mián Khel country, under the foot of the Sulaimáns.
The Balúch, a small tribe of uncertain origin affiliated to tho Lodi tribos.* They seem
to have come in with the earliest Pathan invaders. They hold the country round Papiála,
at the foot of the Salt Range where it leaves the Indus to turn Dorthwards, and are the
dominant race in the north of the Miánwali district. .
The Khason, with the Nur Khel and Malli Khel form a small tribe which claims kinship
with the Lodi, who repudiate the claim. They hold the Khasor rangé, or the ridge of the
lower Salt Range wbich runs down the right bank of the Indus.
The Ghorezai, a petty clan of the Tabarak Káka, and the MIÁNI an insignificant pavindah
clan of the Shiráni tribe, hold lands in the Gomal valley, the former lying south and the
latter nortb of the Lúni river. They graze their flocks during summer on the western
slopes of the Sulaimáns. A portion of the Miáni are independent pauindahs, but closely
allied to those of our plains.
The Kundi are a small pawindah clan who claim descent from the ancestor of the Niázi.
They settled in Tánk with the Daulat Khel Loháni, and originally held the tract along the
Suholi stream in the north-east corner of Tánk. But within the last 80 years "Marwat
immigrants have encroached largely on their eastern lands, Macgregor says they are quiet
and inoffensive and the unfavourable descriptică of thum given in Vol. II, p. 571, is probably
out of date.
The Pawindah Tribes. These tribes, which will be described generally on p. 240 below
although not holding lands in the district, are of considerable administrative interest, as
enormous numbers of them spend the cold weather in the pastures on either side of the
Indus. The principal tribes are noticed below:-
The Nagar claim descent from Hotak, a grandson of Ghilzai; but the Hotak say that
they are a Baloch clan, and merely dependent on them.t. They speak Pashto, but differ
from the Ghilzai in physique. They are the least settled of all the pawindahs, and winter
in the Deraját and summer in the Ghilzai country, having no home of their own. Their
chief wealth is in flocks and herds, and they act as carriers rather than as traders. They
are a rough sturdy lot, but fairly well behaved.
The KHAROT! say they are an offshoot of Tokhi mother of Hotak mentioned above. But
the Tokhi say they are descended from a foundling whom the tribe adopted. They hold the
country about the sources of the Gomal river in Warghún south by east of Gbazni, and they
winter in the Tánk tahsil. They are a poor tribe, and many of them work as labourers or
carriers. Dr. Bellew identifies them with the Arachoti of Alexander's historians, and points
out that they still live in the ancient Arachosia. He.cupsiders them and the Násar to be of
different origin from the mass of the Gbilzai.
The Sulaimán Khel are the most numerous, powerful, and warlike of all the Ghilzai
tribes, and hold a large tract stretching nearly the whole length of the Chilzai country.
Those who trade with India come chiefly from the kills east of Ghazni and winter in the
northern trans Indus tract. Theỹ bring but little merchandise with them but go down
country in great numbers when they act as brokers or dalláls between the merchants and
other pawindahs. They are fine strong men and fairly well behaved, though not bearing:
the best of characters.
The Mián Khels have already been described. The trading and landowning sections are
still along connected, and in fact to some extent indistinguishable.
The DAUTANNI inhabit the Warrah valley and the country hetween the Wazír hills and
Gomal. They are a small but well-to-do tribe, and trade with Bukhára.
The Tokhi were the most prominent of all the Ghilzai tribes till the Hotak gave rulers to
Kandahár about 1710 A. D. They hold the valley of the Tarnak and the north valley of the
Argandáb, with Kelát-i.Ghilzai as their principal centre. :
The Andar occupy nearly the whole of the extensive district of Shalgar south of Ghazni.
With them are associated the Músa Khel Kákar, who are descended from an Andar woman
and live south and west of Shálgar.
. It is not perhaps impossible that these may be of Baloch origin. The Kbotrán, perhaps
of Pathán origin, have become the nucleus of a Baloch tribe.
+ One story makes them the descendants of a gang of blacksmiths who, in the 14th century, .
accompanied the Mián Khel on one of their return journeys to Khorasan and settled there.
I In 1881 some of the tribesmen in Dera Ismail Khán returned themselves as Baloch
Andar,



Pathán tribes.
245
The Tarakki winter about Kandahár. They are largely nomad..
The Border Tribes. The most important tribes on the Dera Ismail border are, beginning
from the south, the Qasráni Baloch and the Ushtaráni, already described on page 224
and pago 225, the Shiráni, and the Mahsúd Waziri. The Waziri will be described when
I come to the border tribes of Bannu.
The Shiráni have already been mentioned and their origin described. They occupy tho
country round the Takht-i-Sulaimán, bounded to the north by the Zankanni stream and to
the south by the Ushtaráni border, their principal habitat being the low valleys to the east
of the Takht. They are divided into the Shiráni proper who hold the greater part of the
tract, the Bábar of our plains described above, and the small tribes of Haripál and
Jalwáni lying to the south of the Shiráni proper. They are of medium height, wiry, and
active, and wild and manly in their appearance. Their dress consists of a couple of coarse
blankets and their principal occupation is agriculture.
The Pathán tribes of Bannu. On the southern border of the Bannu district, marching
with Dera Ismájl, we find the Marwat and the Niázı, the northernmost of the Indian
descendants of Baitari, while further north lie the Wazík and BANNÚCHI, of the great
Karládri section of the Patháns. The migration of the Niázi from Tánk across the Salt
Range, and how the Marwat followed them and drove them across the Kurram, have already
boon described. Their ancestor Niázai had three sons, Bahai, Jamál and Kháku. The
descendants of the first are no longer distinguishable; while the Isa KABL among the Jamál,
and the Musháni and Sarhang clans among the Kháku, have overshadowed the other clans
and given their names to the most important existing divisions of the tribe. The Isa Khel
settled in the south and the Musháni in the north of the country between the Kabát Salt
Range and the Indus, while the Sarhang crossed the river,* and after a struggle lasting
nearly a century and a balf with their quondam allies the Gakkhars and their Ját and Awán
subjects, finally drove the Gakkbars, whose stronghold on the Indus was destroyed by
Ahmad Shah in 1748, eastwards across the Salt Range, and established themselves in
Mianwali.
Towards the close of the 19th centuryt the Mangal, a tribe of the Kodai Karlánri, and the
HANNI, an affiliated tribe of Sayyid origin left their Kurháori home in Birmil, crossed the
Sulaimaps into the Bannu district, and settled in the valleys of the Kurram and Gambála
rivers. About a century later the Bannúchi, the descendants of Shitak, a Kakai Kar!ánri,
by his wife, Bannu, who with their Daur kinsmen then held the hills lying east of the Khost
range in the angle between the Kohát and Banau districts, with their head-quarters at
Shawál, were driven from their homes by the Wazír, and, sweeping down the Kurram
valley, drove the Mangal and Hanni back again into the mountains of Kohát and Kurram
where they still dwell, and occupied the country between the Kurram and Tochi rivers
which they now hold in the north-western corner of the district. At the same time the
Dáwari, & tribe of evil repute in every sense of the word, occupied the banks of the Tochi
beyond our border, which they still hold. Some 400 years ago the Bangi Khel KHATTAK,
occupied the trans-Indus portion of the district above Kálábágh and the spur which the
Salt Range throws out at that point. This they have since held without disturbance.
When the Darvesh Kbel Wazírs (see above), moving from their ancestral homes in
Birmil, drove the Bapnúchi out of the Shawál hills, they occupied the country thus vacated,
and for 350 years confined themselves to the hills beyond our border. But during the latter
half of last century they began to encroach upon the plain country of the Marwat on the
right bank of the Tochi, and of the Banuúcbi on the left bank of the Kurram. At first their
visits were confined to the cold season ; but early in the present century, in the period of
anarchy which accompanied the establishment of the Sikh rule in Bannu, they fiually made
good their footing in the lands which they had thus acquired and still hold.
The latest comers are the Bitanni, who have within the last 60 years occupied a small tract
on the north-eastern border of the Marwat at the foot of the hills. Thus Patháns hold all
trang.Indus Banou, and as much of the cis-Indus portion of the district as lies north of a line
joining the junction of the Kurram and Indus with Sakesar, the peak at which the Salt Range
enters the district and turns nortbwards. The trans-Indus Pathans, with the partial excep.
tion of the Niázi, speak Pashto of the soft and western dialect; the Niázi speak Hindko,
especially east of the Indus,
* The Kalid-i-Afgháni says that they held Lakki and were driven out across the river by
he Khatak. This seems improbable.
+ The Kalid-i-Afgháni fixes this date at the middle of the 19th century, and that of the
Bannúchi invasion at about 1300 A,D.



24.3
Pathán tribes.
I now proceed to a detailed description of the different tribes, beginning from the
south :-
The Marwat hold almost the whole of the Lakki tahsil, that is to say, the south-eastern
half and the whole central portion of the country between the trans. Indus Salt Range and
the Wazir hills. Within the last 80 years they have begun to retrace their footsteps and
have passed southwards over the Salt Range into Dera Ismail, where they occupy small
tracts wrested from the Kundi in the northern corner of Tánk and along the foot of the
bills, and from the Balúch in the Paniála country. Their most important clans are the Músa
Khel, Acha Khel, Khuda Khel, Bahrám, and Tapi. With them are associated a few of the
Niázi, who remained behind when the main body of the tribe was expelled. The Marwat
are as fine and law-abiding a body of men as are to be found on our border. They ara &
simple, manly, and slow-witted people, strongly attached to their homes, good cultivators,
and of pleasing appearance. Their women are not secluded. Their history has been
sketched above. Their hereditary enemies, the Khatak, say of them: “Keep à Marwat to
look after asses; his stomach well filled and his feet well worn."
The Bannúchi hold the central portion of the Bannu tahsil, between the Kurram and
Tochi rivers. Their history has already been narrated. They are at present, perhaps more,
hybrid than any other Pathán tribe. They have attracted to themselves Sayyids and other
doctors of Isláin in great numbers, and have not hesitated to intermarry with these, with the
scattered representatives of the former inhabitants of their tract who remained with them as
hamsáya, and with the families of the various adventurers who have at different times
settled amongst them; insomuch that “Banduchi in its broadest sense now means all
Mahomedans, and by a stretch, eren Hindus long domiciled within the limits of the irrigated
tract originally occupied by the tribe.” The descendants of Shitak, however, still preserve
the memory of their separate origin and distinguish themselves as Bannúchi proper. They
are of inferior physique, envious, secretive, cowardly, lying, great bigots, inoffensive, and
capital cultivators." Sir Herbert Edwardes says of them: "The Bannúchis are bad
specimens of Afgháns; can worse be said of any race? They have all the vices of Patháng,
rankly luxuriant, their virtues stunted." Their Isakhi clan, however, is famed for the
beauty of its women. “Who marries not an Isakhi woman deserves an ass for a bride."
The Niázi hold all the southern portion of Isa Khel and the country between Mianwali
and the hills ; in other words, so much of the Bannu and Miánwali districts as is contained
between the Salt Range on either side the Indus, and Kurram and a line drawn from its
mouth due east across the Indus. Their history and distribution have already been related.
They are indifferent cultivators, and still retain much of the Pathán pride of race. The
cis-Indus branch is the more orderly and skilful in agriculture. The Isa Khel is the
predominant and most warlike section ; but they all make good soldiers. A section of them
is still independent and engaged in pawindah traffic, spending the summer above Kandahar
and wintering in Dera Ismail. They are strict Sunnis. They seem to be a quarrelsome
people, for the proverb says-"The Niazi like rows."
Minor tribes are the Mughal Khel clan of Yusufzai who conquered a small tract round
Ghoriwál some seven centuries ago, and still show their origin in speech and physiognomy.
The GURBUZ, an unimportant tribe, have now returned to their original seat west of the
Khost range, and north of the Dáwari.
The Wazirs are one of the most poweriui and most troublesome tribes on our border,
the Mahsúd being pre-eminent for turbulence and lawlessness. They are exceedingly
democratic and have no recognised headmen, which increases the difficulty of dealing with
them. They are tall, active, muscular, and courageous, and their customs differ in several
respects from those of the Patháns in general. They are still in a state of semi-barbarism.
They are well described in the Baiyát-i-Afgháni (pages 227 ff of the translaticn). Mr.
Thorburn estimate the Wazir population of the purely Wazír border villages alone at 13,523,
and there are always many members of tribe scattered about the district in search of work
or of opportunities for theft,' especially during the spring months.
The Pathun tribes of Kuhát.- The Patháns of Kohát belong almost entirely to two great
tribes, the KHAT'TAK vf the Kakai section of the Karlánri, and the BANGASH, a Qureshi tribe of
Arab descent. The original home of the Khattak, in common with the other sections of the
Karlánri, was the west face of the northern Sulaimáns, where they held the valley of Shawál
now occupied by the Wazirs.* Towards the close of the 13th centuryf they, with the Mangal
* Dr. Bellew says that the Khattak held all the plain country of the Indus as far south as
Dera Ismail Khán till driven out by the Wazir who being in their turn driven southwards
by the pressure of Biloch tribes moving up the Indus valley, passed onwards into the hills
then held by the Banduchi. He gives no authority for this account, which does not agree
with the tradition of the Khattak themselves as related in the Kalid-i-Afgháni.
+ The Kalid.i-Afgháni places the migration in the middle of the 12th century, and the
Banduchi migration at about 1300 A, D,



Pathán tribes.
247
and Hanni, two tribes of the Kodai section of the Karlápri, moved eastwards, the two last
descending into the Bannu district and settling along the Kurram and Gambila, while the
Khattak held the hills to the west of our border. A century later the Bannúchi drove, as
already related the Mangal and Hanni out of Bannu; and not long after this the Khattak
quarrelling with the Bannuchi, moved to the north and east and occupied the hilly country,
then uninhabited, which stretches across the centre of the Kohát district to the Indus, leav-
ing behind them the Para Chamkanni, a tribe (perhaps of Persian origin) who had taken
refuge with them, and the bulk of whom now occupy the north-east corner of the Kurram
Valley, while another section still lives in a state of barbarism about Káníguram as subjects
of the Wazir. At this time the ORAKZAI, another tribe of the Kodái Karlánri, held all the
valley of Kohát in the north and north-east of the district from Resi on the Indus to Kohát:
while the Bangash, already alluded to, lived in the country about Gardez in Zurmat. But
in the latter part of the 14th century the Bangash, increasing in number and being pressed
upon by the Ghilzai, emigrated eastwards en masse and settled in Kurram. Being presently
driven out by the TÚBI* and JÁJI, tribes of doubtful origin who claim descent from Khugi-
áni, son of Kakai, but who are perhaps of Awán stockt though now Pathans for all practi.
cal purposes, and who still occupy the valley, they joined with the Khattak who had quar.
relled with the Orakzai, and drove the latter out of Kohát. The struggle was 'prolonged for
nearly a century; but by the close of the 15th century the Orakzai had been driven into the
lower of the ranges which form the eastern extremity of the Safed Koh and lie along the
north-western border of the Kohát district. The Khattak and Bangash then possessed them.
selves of all the northern and central portions of Kohát and divided the country between them,
the former taking all the southern and central portions while the latter took the northern and
north-western tract consisting of the Kohát and Miránzai valleys up to the base of the Orakzai
or Samána range ; and the hills between Gada Khel and lláchi were then fixed and still remain
as the boundary between the two tribes. In the time of Akbar, Malik Akor was the leader
of the Khattak, and he was granted an extensive tract of land south of the Kábul river
between Khairábád and Naushahra on condition of his guarding the high road between
Attock and Pesháwar. This brought him into contact with the Mandanr of Yusufzai who
held the country opposite on the left bank of the Kábul river. Their quarrels were conti.
nual ; and at length in the time of Shábjahán the Khattak crossed the river, possessed
themselves of the strip of land along its north bank from the junction of the Swát river to
the Indus and for a short distance along the right bank of the Indus, and also pushed across
the plain and acquired a position about Jamálgarhi to the north of Mardán, in the very
heart of the Mandanr country, which commands the approaches to Swát on the one hand
and Búner on the other. They have also encroached on the Mohmand and Khalil who lie
to the west of their Peshawar territory. Meanwhile they had gradually spread southwards
to the trans-Indus Salt Range and the Bannu border, and across the Salt Range to the Indus
ac Kalábágh ; and they now hold a broad strip running along its right bank from a little
above the junction of the Kábul river to Kálábágh ; all Kohát save the portion occupied
by the Bangash io the north and north-West of the district and the western half of the
Lündkhwár valley in the north of Yusufzai. They crossed the Indus and are said to have
at one time conquered the Awán country as far east as the Jhelam. But about the middle
of the 17th century they relinquished the greater part of this tract; and now only hold
Makhad in the Attock district, and the left bank of the river as far south as Mari in Bannu.
There are other Khattak holdings scattered about the cis. Indus plains ; but their owners
have no connection with the tribe.
About the middle of the 18th century two parties grew up in the tribe. They temporarily
combined to accompany and assist Ahmad Shah Durráni in his invasion of Hindústán
but after his departure the division became permanent, the eastern or Akora faction hold.
ing the north-eastern portion of Kohát and all the Khattak country of Peshawar, with their
Capital at Akora on the Kábul river, while the western or Teri division hold all the le-
mainder of Kohát, including the south-eastern corner occupied by the Sághri clan, and the
adjoining territory of the Bangi Khel Khattak of Bannu. The western section have their
capital at Teri south-west of Kohát, and in the centre of the hills they first occupied.
Thng with the exception of a few Awán villages in the Bangash country, and a Savvid
village here and there, the whole of Kohát is held by Patbáns, and with the exception of a
narrow strip of land stretching along the northern border of the Teri Khattak from Tooh
to Dhoda which is held by the Niazi, the whole is in the hands of the Bangash and Khattak.
The Nawab of Khattak holds the Teri tract in jáger, possessing exclusive revenue jurisdic.
tion, and large criminal and police powers.
* The Túri were originally hamsáyahs of the Bangash, but rose in rebellion against their
masters.
+ Mr. Merk, however, tells m3 that the Khugiáni claim Durráni origin; and that tbe
claim is admitted by the Darráni, and supported by their genealogies,



248
Pathán tribes.
The KBATTAK: -The history of the Khattak tribe bas been sketched above and a moro
detailed account had been given on pages 526--30 of Vol. II. They are descended from
Luqmán surnamed Khattak, son of Burhan, son of Kakai.* Luqman had two sons Turman
and Bulág. The descendants of the latter are still known as the Bulagi section; while
Tarai, son of Turman, rose to such distinction that the whole section, including two main
clans, the Tari proper and the Tarkai, is called by his name. They have absorbod several
small tribes of doubtful origin, the Muglaki and Saminif belonging to the Bulág, while the
Jalozai, Dangarzai, and Uria Khel belong to the Tari section. The most important clans
of the Tari section are the Apokhel to which the chief's family belongs, and which includes
the septs of the upper and lower Mobmandif who hold the right bank of the Indus below
Attock, and the Mir Khel who hold the Chauntra valley in the centre of the Teri tract.
Among the Bulaqi the most important clan is the Sághri, with its practically independent
Bangi Khel sept. These hold the right bank of the Indus above Kalábágh, while the
Sághri, with the Babar family of the Bangi Khel, also occupy the cis-Indus possessions of
the tribe. Most of the Khattak iq Yusufzai are also Buláq. The Káka Khol section of the
Khattak are descended from the famous saint Shaikh Rahím Yár, and are consequently
venerated by all northorn Pathans. The Khattak are a. fine manly race, and differ froni all
other Pathápe in features, general appearance, and many of their customs. They are the
northernmost of all the Patháns settled on our frontier who speak the soft or western
dialect of Pashto. They are of a warlike nature and have been for centuries at feud
with all their neighbours and witb oue another. They are active, industrious, and "a most
favourable specimen of Pathan," and are good cultivators, though their country is stovy
and unfertile. They are also great carriers and traders, and especially hold all the salt
trade with Swát and Buner in their hands. They are all Runnis. The Marwat, the
hereditary enemy of the Khattak, says: "Friendship is good with any one but a Khattak":
may the devil tako “a Khattak," and ' A Khatak is a hen. If you seize him slowly be sits
down; and if suddenly he clucks.' Another proverb runs thus: “Though the Khattak is
a good horseman, yet be is a man of but one charge,"
The BANGASH.-The early history of the Bangash has also been narrated above. Since
they settled down in their Kohát possessions no event of importance has marked their
history. They claim descent from Khalid ibn Walid, Muhammad's apostle to the Afgháns
of Ghor, and himself of the original stock from which they spraog'; but they are Patháns
"as regards character, customs, crimes, and vices.". Their ancestor had two sons Gár and
Sámil, who, on account of the bitter enmity that existed between them, were nicknamed
Bunkash or root destroyers. These sons have giveu their names to the two great political
factions into which not only the Bangash themselves, but their Afridi, Orakzai, Khattak,
Túri, Zaimusht, and other neighbours of the Karlanri branch are divided, though the
division has of late lost most of its importance.ll The Gári are divided into Míránzai and
Baizai clans. The Baizai hold the valley of Köbát proper; the Miránzai lie to the west of
them in the valley to which they have given their name; while the Sámilzai occupy the
northern portion of Kohát and hold Shalozán at the foot of the Orakzai hills, where they
are independent, or live in Paiwár and Kurram under the protection of the Túri. Tha
Bangash Nawabs of Farrukhábád belong to this tribe.
Border tribes. -The tribes on the Kohát border, beginning from the south, are the
Darvesh Khel Wazírs, the Zaimusht, the Orakzai, and the Afrídi. The Wazírs have already
been described. The Zaimusht are a tribe of Spín Tarín Afgháns who inhabit the hills
between the Kurram and the Orakzai border on the north-west frontier of Kohát. They
belong to the Sámil faction. The early history of the Orakzai has also been given above.
With them are associated the Alikhel, Mishti, the Shaikhán, and some of the Malla Khel,
all of whom are now classed as Orakzai of the Hamsáya clan, though, as the name implies,
distinct by descent. The Orakzai hold the lower south-eastern spurs of the Safed Koh and
* Kakai was son of Karlán, founder of the Karlánri division of the Afgháns.
† Dr. Bellew interprets those names as meaning respectively Mongol and Chinese (!)
The Mohmandi of the Khwarra valley of the Kohát district are quite distinct from the
Mohmand of Pesháwar.
& Dr. Bellew thinks that they and the Orakzai are, perhaps, both of Scythian origin, and
belonged to the group of Turk tribes, among whom he includes all the Karlánri, or, as he
calls them, Turklánri, who came in with the invasion of Sabuktagin in the 10th and Taimur
in the 16th century of our æra.
il Dr. Bellew is of bpinion that these names denote respectively the Magian and Buddhist
religions of their ancestors. The present division of the tribes is given as follows by Major
James : Sámil. -Half the Orakzai, half the Bangash, the Mobmand, and the Malikdin Khol,
Sepáh, Kamr, Zakha Kbel, Aka Khel, and Adam Khel clans of Afridi. Gár.-Half the
Orakzai, half the Bangash, the Khalfl and the Kuki Khel and Qambar Khel clans of Afridi.
Tho feud betwoen the two factions is still very strong and bitter, and is supplemented by
the sectarian animosity between Sbíah and Sunni.



Pathán tribes.
249
the greater part of Tíráh. They are divided into five great clans, the Allezai, Massozai,
Daulatzai, Ismáſlzai, and Lashkarzai, of which the Daulatzai and Massozai are the most
numerous. The Muhammad Khel is the largest sept of the Daulatzai, and, alone of the
Orakzai, belongs to the Shiah sect. They are a fine manly tribe, but exceedingly turbulent.
They are divided between the Sámil and Gár factions. There are a considerable number
of Orakzai tenants scattered about the Kohát district. The present rulers of Bhopál belong
to this tribe. The Afrídi will be found described below among the border tribes of
Peshawar.
The Pathán tribes of Peshawar.-The Patháns of Pesháwar belong, with the exception of
the Khattak described above, almost wholly to the Afgháns proper, descendants of
Barban; and among them to the line of Karshabún or the representatives of the ancient
Gandhári, as distinguished from the true Afgháns of Jewish origin who trace their descent
from Sharkhabún. I have already told, how during the 5th or 6th century a Gandhari
colony emigrated to Kandahár, and there were joined and converted by the Afghán stock
of Ghor who blended with them into a single nation. Their original emigration was due
to the pressure of Ját and Scythic tribes who crossed the Hindu Kush and descended into
the valley of the Kábul river. Among those tribes was probably the Dilazák,* who are
now classed as one of the Kodai Karlánri, and who were converted by Mahmúd Ghaznavi
in the opening of the 11th century. They extended their sway over the Ráwalpindi and
Peshawar districts and the valley of the Kábul as far west as Jalálábád, driving many of the
original Hindki or Gandhári inhabitants into the valleys of Swát and Buner which lie in
the hills to the north, and ravaging and laying waste the fertile plain country. Amalga-
mating with the remaining Hindkis they lost the purity of their faith, and were described as
infidels by the Afgháns who subsequently drove them out.
The Kandahár colony of Gandhári was divided into two principal sections, the Khakhai
and Ghoria Khel, besides whom it included the descendants of Zamand and Kansi. I give
below the principal tribes which trace their descent from Kharshabún for convenience of
reference:
Mandanr ... ... Hold the Pesháwar plain
north of the Kábul river
called British Yusufzai, the
| Yusufzai ..
Chamlah valley on the Po.
sháwar border, and part of
the Haripur tract in Hazára.
Khakhai .. .
(Yusulzai proper... Hold Swát, Buner, Panjkora,
and Dír; the hills north of
the Yusufzai plain.
Gugiáni ... ... ... ... Hold Doába ; the plains in the
angle between the Kábul
Kand ... {
and Swat river.
| Tarklánri ... ... ... ... Hold Bajaur tract west of
Swat.
(Plains Mohmand Hold plains of Peshawar on
Mohmand ...
right bank of Bára river.
(Bar Mohmand ... Hold mountains north of Ká.
Ghoria Kbel < .
bul river and west of the
Swát. Kábul Doáb,
( Daudzai ... ... ... ... Hold Pesháwar plain on right
bank of Kabul river to
little below the junction of
the Bára river.
Khalil
... ... Hold the Pesháwar plaing bo.
tween the Dáudzai and the
Khaibar.
Muhammadzai
... Hold Hashtnagar, the plains
Zamand
east of Swát river in Peshá.
... Scattered
(Shinwári ...
... Hold part of Khaibar moun.
Kánsi ... ...
tains and the northern
slopes of the Safed Koh.
(Others
... Scattered,
war.
(Others
Jo
Kánai..... šiavári
• Dr. Bellow sooms doubtful whether the Dilazák were of Ját or of Rájput extraction,
He says the name is of Buddhist origin.



250
Pathán tribes.
. About the middle of the 13th century they were settled about the headwaters of the Tarnak
and Arghasan rivers, while the Tarín Afgháns held, as they still hold, the lower valleys of
those streams. As they increased in numbers tho weaker yielded to pressure, and the Kha.
khai Khel, accompanied by their first cousins the Muhammadzai descendants of Zamand,
and by their Karlánri neighbours, the Utmán Khel of the Gomal valley * left their homes,
and migrated to Kábul. Thence they were expelled during the latter half of the 15th
century by Ulugh Beg, a lineal descendant of Taimur and Babar's uncle, and passed east.
wards into Ningrahar on the northern slopes of the Safed Koh, and into the Jalólábád
valley. Here the Gugiani settled in eastern and the Muhammadzai in western Ningrabar,
the Tarklánri occupied Lughman, while the Yusufzai (I used the word throughout in its
widest sense to include both the Mandaur and the Yusufzai proper) and Utmán Khel moved
still further east through the Khaibar pass to Pesháwar. Here they settled peacefully for
a while; but presently quarrelled with the Dilazak and expelled them from the Doába or
plain country in the angle between the Swát and Kábul rivers, into which they moved.
They then crossed the Swát river into Hashtnagar and attacked the Eastern Shilmani, a
tribe probably of Indian origin, who had only lately left their homes in Shilman on the
Kurram river for the Khaibar mountains and Hashtnagar. These they dispossessed of
Hashtnagar and drove them northwards across the mountains into Swát, thus acquiring all
the plain country north of the Kábul river and west of Hoti Mardán.
Meanwhile the Ghoria Khel whom they had left behind in the. Kandahár country had
been following in their track; and early in the 16th century they reached the western
mouth of the Khaibar pass. Here they seem to have divided, a part of the Mohmand now
known as the Bar Mohmand crossing the Kábul river at Dakka, while the remainder went
on through the pass to the plain of Peshawar lately vacated by the Yúsufzai, where they
defeated the Dilazák in a battle close to Peshawar, drove them across the Kábul river into
what are now called the Yusufzai plains, and occupied all the flat country south of the
Kábul river and west of Jalozai This they still hold, the Dá údzai bolding the right bank
of the Kábul river, and the Khalil the left bank of the Bára river and the border strip
betweer the two streams facing the Khaibar pass, while the Mokruånd took the country
south of the Bára and along the right bank of the Kábut as far as Naushahra, though
they have since lost the south-eastern portion of it to the Khatak. Meanwhile the Bar
Mohmand made themselves masters of the bill country lying north of the Kábul river as
far up as Lálpura and west of the Doaba, and possessed themselves of their ancestral capital
Gandhára, driving out into káfiristán the inhaøitents, who were probably tbeir ancient
kiasunen, the descendants of such Gagdhart as had not accompanied them when, two
centuries earlier, they had migrated to Kandabár. They then crossed the Kábul river,
Aud Jossessed themselves of the country between its right bank and the orest of the Afridi
hills to the north of the Roaibar pass.
While these events were occurring, the Gugiáni, Tarklánri,T and Mohammadzai, who had
been left behind in Ningrahár, moved eastwards, whether driven before them by the
advancing Ghoria Khel, or called in as allies against the Dilazák by the Yusufzai. At any
rate they joined their friends in Doába and Hashtnagar, and attacking the Dilazák, drova
them out of Yúsulzai and across the Indus. They then divided their old and new
possessions among the allies, the Gugiani receiving Doába, the Muhammadzai Hashtnagar,
while the Yusufzai, Utmán Khel, and Tarklárri took the great Yusufzai plain. During
the next twenty years these three tribes made themselves masters of all the hill country
along the Yusufzai, Hashtnagar, and Bar Mohmand border, from the Indus to the range
separating the Kunar and Bajaur valleys, the inhabitants of which, again the ancient
Gandhári who had already suffered at the hands of the Bar Mohmand, they drove east and
west across the Indus into Hazara and across the Kurram into Kafiristán. This country
also they divided, the Tarklánri taking Bajaur, and the Utmán Khel the valley of the
Swát river up to Arang Barang and its junction with the Panjkora, while the Yusufzai held
all the hills to the east as far as the Indus and bordering upon their plain country,
including lower Swát, Buner, and Chamlah. Some time later the Khatak obtained from
Akbar, as has already been related, a grant of the plains in the south-east of the Pesháwar
district. Thus the Khakhai and their allies held all the country north of the Kábul river
from the Indus to Kunar, including the hills north of the Pesháwar but excluding those
Jyiog west of Doába which were occupied by the Bar Mohmand; while all the plain
country south of the Kábul was held, in the east by the Khatak ard in the west by the
Ghoria Khel. These last attempted to cross the river into Yusufzai, but were signally
defeated by the Yusufzai, and have never extended their dominions. How the Khatak
pushed across into the Yusufzai plaiu has already been told. The Dilazák, thus expelled
* Another story makes the Utmán Khel descendants of one. Utmán, a follower of Mahmud
Ghaznavi, who settled circa 1000 A. D. in the country which they now hold,
A section of Tarklánri remained in Laghmán, where they still dwell,



Pathán tribes.
251
from their territory, made incessant efforts to recover it; until finally, as the cause of
tumult and disorder, they were deported en masse by the emperor Jabángír and scattered
over the Indian peninsula. When the Yúsafzai settled in their possessions they divided
the hill and plain country equally between their two great sections, the Mandanr and the
Yusufzai proper. But feuds sprang up amongst them which were fomented by the
Mughal rulers; and early in the 17th century the Yusufzai expelled the Mandapr from
Swát and Buner, while the Mandanr in their turn expelled the Yúgufzai from the greater
part of the Yusufzai plain. Thus the Yusufzai now höld Swát, Buner, and the Lundkhwár
and Ránízai valleys in the north-west of Yusufzai ; while the Mandanr hold Chamlah and
the remainder of the plain country.
The Pathan tribes of Pesháwar continued. —The Plain MOHMAND.--I now proceed to
describe the tribes in detail. Passing from Kobát into Pesháwar through the country of
the Khatak, who have already been described and turning west, we first come to the lower
or Plain Mohmand, who occupy the south-west corner of the district, south of the Bára
stream. They are divided into five main sections, the Mayázai, Músazai, Dawezai, Matanni
and Sarganni. Their Leadmen, in common with those of all the Ghoria Khel, are arbáb, &
title meaning master, and conferred by the Mughal emperors.* They are good and indus.
trious cultivators, and peacefully disposed except on the Afridi border. Their relation with
the Bar Mobmand, from whom they are now quite separate, differing from them in both
manners and customs, is described on page 254.
The KHALIL Occupy the left bank of the Bára, and the country along the front of the
Khaibar pass. They have four main clans, Matúzai, Bározai, Ishaqsai, and Tilarzai, of
which the Bározai is the most poworful. They are not good cultivators. Thore are some
of the tribe still to be found in Kandahár.
The Dáudzai occupy the left bank of the Kábul river as far down as the junction of the
Béra. The Mohmand and Daudzai are descended from a common ancestor Daulatyar, son
of Ghorai, the progenitor of the Ghoria Khel. Daud had threo sons, Mandkai, Mamur and
Yusuf, from whom are descended the main sections of the tribe. Mandkai had three sons,
Husain, Nekai and Balo of whom only the first is represented in Peshawar. Nekai filed into
Hindustán, while Balo's few descendants live in parts of Tirah.
The GOGIANI hold the Doába or plain country in the angle between the Kábul and
Swát rivers. They are descended from Mak, the son of Khakhai, by a hamsáya shepherd
who married Mak's daughter Gugi, whence the name. They are divided into two great
sections, Hotak and Zirak. Macgregor says that other Patháns do not recognise them as
of puro Pathán blood.
The MUHAMMADZart hold Hashtpagar, a strip of territory some 13. miles broad running
down the left bank of the Swát river from our border to Naushahra. They are descended
from Muhammad, one of the sons of Zamand ; and with them are settled a few descendants
of his brothers, from one of whom, Kboshgi, one of their principal villages is named. Their
clans are Práng, Ohársadda, Razar, Utmáazai, Turangzai, Umarzai, Bherpao and Tangi
with its two septs Barazai and Nasratzai.
The BAIZAI.--The Yúsufzai proper are divided into the Badi Khel (now extinet), Isázai,
Iliászai, Malizai and Akozai. The Akozai are further divided into three clans, the Ránízait
who hold the western portion of the hills between Yusufzai and Swát, the Khwajazai who
occupy the country between the Swát and Panjkora rivers, and the Baizai. The last origi-
nally held the Lundkhwár valley in the centre of the northernmost portion of the Pasháwar
district, and all the eastern hill country between that and the Swát river. The hills they
still hold; but the Khattak have,g as already recounted, obtained all the western portion
of the valley, while the Utmán Khel Karlánri, whom the Baizai called in as allies in a foud
with their neighbours and kiusmen the Ránízai, have obtained its north-east corner, and
the Baizai Dow hold only a small tract to the south of these last. They are divided into
six septs, Abba Khel, Aziz Khel, Bábozai, Matorezai, Músa Khel, and Zangi Khel. The
last lies sovih of the Ilam range which divides Swát from Buner. The other five originally
held the Baizai valley and the hills to the north; but since the irruption of the Khatak
and Utmán Khel, only the first three hold land íá our territory.
* Arbáb is the plural of the Arabic rab or lord; a term often applied to the Deity.
† The tribo is often called Mohmandzai or Mámanzai, and their ancestor, Mohmand or
Meman.
$ The Haiyát.;- Afgháni calls the Ránízai a sept of the Baizai. This seems improbable,
as they descend from different wives of Ako.
$ Some say that tho Khatak, as well as the Ttmán Khel, were called in as allion against
the Rinimai.



252
Pathán tribes.
The Mandanr, hold the remaindor of the Poshawar district. They are divided into main
clan as follows:-
Mishrinzai.
"
(Usmánzai
(Kamilzai
(Amazai
(Allzai.
Kanázai.
(Akazai.
Kishrinzai.
Daulatzai.
Ismálisai.
...
Mandanr
.
...
Utmánzai
Saddozai.
Razar ...
Mánozai.
| Malakzai.
{ Ako Khel.
Khidrzai.
(Mámúzaí.
Tho Saddozai are by origin a branch of the Utmádzal by & second wife of Utmán, but thoy
are practically separated from them. The Usmánzai occupy all the northern and wostern
portions of the Mandant tract, the Kamálzai lying to the west immediately south of the
Lundkhwár valley and stretching as far down as the border for the Bulaq Khatak, whilo
the Amázai lie to the east and south-east of the same valley. Of the septs, the Kishranzai,
who hold Hoti and Mardán, and the Daulatzai lie to the north, and tho Mishránzai and the
Ismailzai to the south of the respective tracts. South of the Amázai, and between them and
the Khatak territory, come the Razar; while the Utmánzai and Saddozai hold the extremo
oast of the district on the right bank of the Indus, the Saddozai lying to the west and the
Utmánzai to the east. These latter also hold a small area in the south of the independent
Gadún valley, and early in the 18th century were called across the Indus by the Gujars of
Hazára as allies against the Train Afgháns, and appropriated the Gandgarh tract from
Torbela to the southern border of Hazára. In this tract all three of their main septs aro
represented, the Tarkheli section of the Alízai holding the southern half of the tract, and
stretching across the border into Attock. The Kbudu Khel, a Saddozai sopt, occupy tho
valleys between Chamlah and the Gadún country. The valley of Chamlah, on the Peshawar
border and north of the Gadún country, is occupied by a mixture of Mandanr clans, in
which the Amázai, whoso Ismáílzai sept hold the Mahában country, largely preponderato.
The Mandanr, living almost wholly within our territory and long subject to the ruler of
Peshawar, are perhaps more civilised and less impatient of control than any other Pathan
tribo.
The Pathán tribes of the Peshawar border. The APRÍDI.-Dr. Bellow says that the Afridi,
whom be identifies with the Aparytą of Herodotus, originally held the whole of the Safed
Koh system between the Kábul and Kurram river, from the Indus to the beadwaters of the
Kurram and the Powár ridge. But since the great Scythic invasions of the 5th and sac-
coeding centuries, they have been successively encroached upon by tribes of very diverso
origin; first by the Orakzai and Bangash to the south, and later by the Waziri and Turi
to the south-west, the Khatak to the east, and the Ghilzai, Kbugiáni and Shinwari to the
West. They now hold only the central fastnesses of the eastern extremity of the Safed
Kob; namely, the Khaibar mountains, the valley of the Bára and the range south of that
valley which separates Kohát from Posháwar, and the northern parts of Tiráh, which they
recovered from the Orakzai in the time of Jahangir. The Pathán historians traco tboir
descent from Burbán, son of Kakai, grandson of Karlínri, by his son Usmán surnamod
Afridi, and say that in the 7th century the Kbaibar tract was hold by Rajputs of the Bhatti
tribe and Yádúbansi stock, subjects of the Raja of labore, who were constantly harassed
by the Afgháns of Ghor and the Sulaimáds; and that about the end of the century the
Afridi, then in alliance with the Gakkhars, obtained from the Lahore government all the
hill country west of the Indus and south of the Kábul river on condition of guarding the
frontier against invasion. The Afridi are divided into five clans, of which the Ula Kbel
and in it the Zakha Khel sept is the largest, while the Mita Khel aro no longer to be found
in Afahánistán and the Miri Khel have boon amalgamatod with the Malikdin and Aka Khel.
Some of the principal divisions are shown below:
1. Míta Khel.
8. Miri Kholo
i Bassi Khel.
8. Aka Khel ...
Madda Khel.
... 3 Sultán Khel.
Miro Khel.



Pathán tribes.
253
Goo
Galli.
(Firoz Khel ... { Kamar Khel.
Malikdin Khal.
4. Ula Kbel ...
bar Khel.
(Khaibar Afridi),
( Sepáh.
( Zakha Khol.
Hasan Khel.
Jawáki.
6. Adam Khel
(Ashu Khel,
But for practical purposes they are divided at present into eight clang--vix., Kuki Khal,
Malikdin Khel, Qambar Khol, Kamar Khel, Zakha Khel, Aka Khel, Sepáh, and Adam Rbol,
whose names are printed in italics in the above table.
The Adam Khel, who include the Hasan Khel and Jawáki septs so well known on our
border, occupy the range between Kohát and Peshawar, from Akor west of the Kohát pass
to the Khatak boundary. The Hasan Khel hold the land along the southern border
of the Peshawar, from A kor west of the Kohát pass to the Khattak boundary. The
Hasan Khel hold the land along the southern border of the Pesháwar and the north-
eastern border of the Kohát district. Next to them come the Aka Khel who hold
the low range of hills from Akor to the Bára river, the Bassi Khel sept lying nearest
to British territory. These two clans occupy the south-eastern corner of the Afridi
country, and lead a more settled life than their kinsmen, being largely engaged in
the carriage of wood and salt between Protected Territory and British India. The other
tribos are in some degree migratory, wintering in the lower hills and valleys, while in the
hot weather they retire to the cool recesses of the upper mountains. But their general
distribution is as follows: North of the Bára river is the Kajúri plain, which forms the
winter quarters of the Malikdin Khel, Qambar Kbel, Sepáh, and Kamar Khel. The Qambar
Khel pass the summer in Tíráh. The Sepáh's summer quarters are in the Bára valley ;
while the Kamar Khel spend the hot months in the spurs of Safed Koh between Maidán and
Bára, and are better cultivators and graziers and less habitual robbers than their kinsmen.
The Zakha Khel are the most wild and lawless of the Afrídi clans. Their upper settlements
are in the Maidán and Bára districts, and their winter quarters lie in the Bazar valley
north of Landi Kotal, and in the Khaibar from Ali Masjid to Landi Kotal. Their children
are christened by being passed backwards and forwards through a hole made in a wall aftor
the fashion of a burglar, while the parents repeat“ Be a thief ; be thief "-an exhortation
which they comply with scrupulously when they arrive at years of discretion. They are
notorious as liars and thieves, even among the lying and thieving Afridi. The Kúki Khel
hold the eastern mouth of the Khaibar, and the pass itself as far as Ali Masjid. In summer -
they retire to the glen of Rájgal, north of Maidán, in the Safed Koh. They trade in fire.
wood, and offend rather by harbouring criminals than by overt acts of aggression. The
Afridi is the most barbarous of all the tribes of our border. All the Karlánri, with the
single exception of the Khatak, are wild and uncontrollable ; but most of all the Afrídi.
" Ruthless cowardly robbery and cold-blooded treacherous murder are to an Afrídi the salt
of life. Brought up from earliest childhood amid scenes of appalling treachery and merci.
less revenge, nothing has yet changed him: as he lives, a shameless cruel savage, so he
dies. Yet he is reputed brave, and that by men who have seen him fighting; and he is on
the whole the finest of the Pathán races of our border. His physique is exceptionally fine,
and he is really braver, more opea and more treacherous than other Patháns. This much
is certain, that he has the power of prejudicing Englishmen in his favour; and few are
brought into contact with him who do not at least begin with entbusiastic admiration for
his manliness."'* He is tall, spare, wiry, and athletic; hardy and active, but impatient of
heat. His women are notoriously unchaste. Be is..only nominally & Musalmán, being
wholly ignorant and intensely superstitious. The Zakha Khel removed the odium under
which they suffered of possessing no shrine at which to worship, by inducing a sainted man
of the Kaka Khel to come and settle among them, and then murdering him in order to bury
his corpse and thus acquire a holy place of their own. The Afrídi are intensely democratic,
the nominal chiefs having but little power.
The MOLLAGORI.--North of the Afridi come the Mollágori, a small and inoffensive tribe
who are associated with the hill Mohmand but whose Pațbán origin is douðtful. They
hold the Tartara country north of the Khaibar range. They are noted thieves, but copline
thomselves to petty offences.
The SHINWARI are the only branch of the descendants of Kánsi, third son of Karshabanit
who still retain a corporate exietence as a tribe. They lie west of the Mullágori, hold the
# Macgregor's Gazetteer of the North. Western Frontier, sub voce Afridi.
| Dr. Bellow says they came from Persia in the time of Nadir Shah, and settled among
the batháng.



254
Pathán tribes.
hills to the north of the western end of the Khaibar pass, and thenco stretch along the
northern slopes of the Safed Bob ap to the Khagiáni territory. Thoy are divided into
four great clans, Sangu Khel, Ali Shør Kbel, Sepáb, and Mandozai. The Khaibar Sbinwári
belong to the Ali Sher Khel, and live in the Loárgi valloy at Landi Kotal. Their princi.
pal septs are Piro Khel, Mír Dad Khel, Khúga Khel, Shekh Mal Khel, and Sulemán Khel.
They are largely engaged in the carrying trade between Peshawar and Kábul ; and are
stalwart, hardworking and inoffensive, though much addicted to petty thieving. Tboy
probably came up to this part of the country with the Ghoria Khel (800 page 250).
The BAR MOHMAND. - The history of the hill or Bar Mohmand has been related in section
409. They hold the hills to the west of the Doába between the Kábal river and Bajaur
and Utmán Khel country, the southern portion of Kunar, and some of the northern hills
of the Khaibar. They have also spread across our border along the Kábul river, betweon
the two branches of which the Halimzæi olan hold a small area lying between the Dáádzai
and the Gagiáni. Their principal sections are Baizai, Khwáezai, Dawezai, Utmánzai,
Kukozai, and Tarakzai, the last of which is divided into Halimzai, Isa Khel, Barbán Khel
and Tarakzai proper. The Halimzai and Tarakzai proper hold land on oor border, tho
otbers living further west. The Kbán of Lálpara, Chief of the Mohmand, who belongs to
the Tarakzai clan, probably enjoys more real power than any other tribal chief among
the Patháns of our immediate border. The Mobmand is almost as great a savage as the
Afridi, wbile bis venality is even greater. "You have only got to put & ropes in your
eye, and you may look at any Mobmanu, man or woman." They formerly gave much
trouble on our border..
The UTMAN KHEL.-The history of the Utmán Khel bas already been sketched. They
ocoopy both banks of the Swát river beyond our border as far up as Arang Bárang, and
havo, as stated in section 410, obtained a portion of the Baizai valley of Landkhwár. The
two chief clans are the Umar Khel and Asíl Khel, the former of which hold the hills on
the Pegbáwar frontier, while the latter who live on the Swát river are more poworful.
“ They are described as tall, stout, and fair, often going naked to the waist. The women
laboar like the men, and everytbing shows tbe absence of civilization. They are
a sober people, with none of the vices of tbe Yúgufzai."* They give us but little
trcuble.
The Y080TZAI proper.The bistory of the Yúsafzai has already been related. Their
Badi Khel (almost extinct).
main divisions are shown in the margin. The holdings of
(Hasanzai.
the Akozai clans have already been described in suction
Isazai ... Madákhol.
410. The Isázai bold the north-east slopes of Mabában,
(Akázai.
Iliászai.
and the mountainous country on both sides of the Indus
(Daulatzai.
in Bazára and the Gadúo valley. The Malízai hold
Malizai . Chagbarzai.
eastern and the Iliászai western Buner. The Ránizai and
(Núrázai.
(Rádizai.
Baizai septs of the Akozai bold all the bills beyond the
Akozai ... Khwajazai.
northern border of Yusofzai, the former to the wost and
Baizai.
the latter to the east. Beyond them in Baner lie the
Salárzai sept of tbe lliászai, and again between them and the Chamlab valloy are tho
Núrazai of the Mulízai clan, which includes the Abazai section. The Yówofzai are
incredibly superstitions, prond, araricious, turbulent, merciless, and revengeful. But they
are of a lively, merry, sociable dispositiou, fond of music and poetry, and very jealous of
the honour of their women. Their tribal constitution is distinctly democratio.
The Jadún Country.-Soath of the Yúsafzai territory come Chamlah and the Kbudu
Khel territory already noticed. The southero parts of the country between Posháwar
and Hazára constitute the GADON or JADÚN country. The boldings of other tribes jo this
valley bave already been noticed. The Jadún themselves occupy all the eastern portions
of the valley and the southern slopes of Mahában down to the Indos, as well as a con-
siderable area io Hazara.
The Pathán tribes of Hazára,—The Hazára mountains on-this side of the Indus were from
a very early date inhabited by a mixed population of Indian origin, the Gakkhars occupying
the portion to the south and having authority over the Rajputs of the eastern hills, while &
Gújar population held most of tbe northern and central parts of the district. In 1399 A.D.
a family of Karlúgh Túrks came into India with Taimur, settled in the Pakhli plain in the
north and centre of the district, and established their rule over the whole of the district
then known as the kingdom of Pakhli.t I have already related how, about the middle of tho
16th century, the Dilazák were driven out of Posháwar across the Indus, and were presently
* Macgregor's Gazetteer, sub voce Utmán Khel.
+ Colonel Waco said they were & clan of the Hazára Túrks. But the Túrks who gavo
their namo to the district are supposed to have come with Changiz Khan and not with
Taimur. Perhaps they were the same mon, and have confused the two invaders in their
traditions.



Pathán tribos.
285
followed by the representatives of the old Gandhári, the present inhabitants of Swát and
Buner and the mountains north and east of Pesháwar. As the Afgháns who bad possessed
themselves of the trans-Indus tract opposite the Hazára district increased in numbers and
extended their rule, successive bands of the old inhabitants crossed the river and settled in
Hazára. About the end of the 17th century* a Sayyid named Jalá) Bába , ancestor of the
famous Sayyids of Kágán, came with a heterogeneous following from Swát, drove out the
Karlágh, and appropriated the northern half of the district, including the valley of Kágán.
About the same time the Tanáoli crossed the river and occupied the hill country between
Abbottábád and the river, now known by their name as Tanáwal ; while the Jadún came
over from their original seat between Pesháwar and Hazára and possessed themselves of tho
tract south of Abbottábád, the Tarín drove out or subjected the Gújar families of the
Hazára plain, and the Utmánzai, called across the Indus by the Gújars as allies, appropriated
the Gandgarh tract along the bank of the river from Torbela to the bourdary of the district.
During the first 20 years of the 19th century the Durráni lost their hold on the district,
something like anarchy prevailed, and the distribution of tribes gradually assumed its
present form. This may be broadly described as follows. Afgháns hold the country
between the Gandgarh range and the Indus, and the plains for some little distance south-east
of the junction of the Siran and Dor, Tribes of Indian origin hold the whole south-east of
the district and the eastern bills as high up as Garhi Habibullah opposite uzaffarábád,
the Gakkhars holding the south of the tract along both banks of the Haro river, while
above them the Dhúnds, Karráls, and Sarráls, occupy the hills in the south-eastern
corner of the district, and the adjoining Harípur plains are held by a mixed population of
Awáns and Gújars. The remainder of the district, that is the northern and central portion,
is held by tribes which, whatever their origin, have by long association became assimilated
with the Patháns in language and customs, tbe Jadún holding the Dor valley from Bagra
upwards to Mángal, the Tanáoli holding the Tanáwal tract in the west centre of the district
between Abbottábád and the Indus, much of which belongs to the semi-independent Nawab
of Amb, while the Swátis hold the whole mountain country north of Mansehra and Garhi
Habibullah.
Tho Utmánzai have been already fully described among the Peshawar tribes. The
Tarkheli is one of the principal Utmánzai clans in Hazára, and occupies the Gandgarh
country. A few Tarin Afgháns, first cousins of the Abdáli, wrested a considerable portion
of the Harípur plains from Ğújars early in the 18th century, and still live there, but are now
few and unimportant. The Mishwáni are descended from a Sayyid father by a Kákar
woman, and are allied to the Kákar Patháns. A small number of them came across the
Indus with the Utmánzai, to whom they were attached as retainers, and now occupy the
aorth-eastern end of the Gandgarh range, about Sríkot. With the Utmánzai came also å
fow PANNI, a Kákar sect, who are still settled among them.
Non. Frontier Pathons. During the Lodi and Sár dynasties many Pathans migrated to
India, especially during the reign of Bahlol Lodi and Sher Shảh Sur. These naturally,
belonged to the Ghilzai section from which those kings sprang. But large numbers of
Parháns also accompanied the armies of Mahmúd Ghaznavi, Shaháb-ud-din, and Bábar, and
many of them obtained grants of land in the Punjab plains and founded Pathán colonies
which still exist. Many more Patháns have been driven out of Afghánistán by internal
fouds or by famine, and have taken refuge in the plains east of the Indus. The tribes most
commonly to be found in Hindúetan are the Yusufzai, including the Mandanr, the Lodi,
Kákar, Sarwáni, Orakzai, the Karlánri tribes, and the Zamand Pathans. Of these the most
widely distributed are the Yusufzai, of whom a body of 1,200 accompanied Bábar in his final
invasion of India, and settled in the plains of Hindustán and the Punjab. But as a rule the
Patháns who bave settled away from the frontier bare lost all memory of their tribal
divisions, and indeed almost all their national characteristics.
The descendants of Zamand very early migrated in large numbers to Multán, to which
province they furnished rulers till the time of Aurangzeb; when a number of the AbdAli
tribo under the leadership of Shah Husain were driven from Kandahár by tribal feuds,
took refuge in Multán; and beicg early suppleinented by other of their kinsmen who were
expelled by Mír Wais, the great Gbilzai chief, conquered Multán and founded the tribe well
known in the Punjab as Multáni Patháns. Nawab Muzaffar Khán of Multán was fourth in
descent from Shah Husain. When the Zamand section was broken up, the Kbwesbgi clan
migrated to the Ghorband defile, and a large number marched thence with Bábar and found
great favour at his hands and those of Humáyún. One section of them settled at Kasúr, and
are now known as Kasúria Patháns of Guriáni and Gohápa in Robtak are Kákar. They are
said to have settled in the time of Ibrahim Lodi. Those of Jhajjar in the same district aro
said to be Yúsufzai, In the time of Bahlol Lodi, Sarbind was ruled by members of the
# This is the date given approximately by Colonel Waco. It should, perhaps, be put a
sontury earliar.



256
Races akin to Pathán.
Prangi tribe from which he sprang, and many of this tribo are still to be found in Ludhiana,
Rupar, and the north of Ambála. The reigning family of Maler Kotla belong to the Saripal
clan of the Sarwani Afgháns, who, as already related, were driven out of Afghánistán by the
Mián Khel and Bakhtiar in the time of Humáyún. Jahangir, for what reason I do not know,
deported the Míta Khel sept of the Afrídi to Hindustan ; and some of the Afgháns of
Pánípat and Ludhiana are said to be descended from this stock.
RACES ALLIED TO THE PATHÁN.
TANAOLI. - The Tanáoli are said to claim descent from Amir Khán, a Barlis Mughal, whose
two sons Hind Khan and Pal Khán crossed the Indus somo four centuries ago and settled
in Tanáwal of Hazára ; and they say that they are named after some other place of the same
name in Afghánistán. But there can be little doubt that they are of Aryan and probably of
Indian stock. We first find them in the trans-Indus basin of the Mahában, from which they
were driven across the Indus by the Yusufzai some two centuries ago. They now occupy
Tanáwal or the extensive hill country between the river and the Urash plains. They are
divided into two great tribes, the Hindwal apd Pallál, of which the latter occupy the
northern portion of Tanáwal, and their territory forms the jáger of the semi-independent
Chief of Amb. Of the 40,000 Hazára Tanaolis, 8,737 returned themselves in 1881 as Pallál,
1,964 as Dafrál, a sept of the Pallál, and only 1,076 as Hindwal. It is probablo that clans
were not recorded in the Amb territory where the Hindwal, and indeed the great mass of
the Tanáolis dwell. They are an industrious and peaceful race of cultivators; but their
bad faith has given rise to the saying-Tandoli be.qauli, "the Tankoli's word is naught.”
DILAZÁK and TÁJIK.-The Dilazák are distinct from the Tajik. The origin and early
history of the Dila zák have already been noticed in Vol. II, pp 241--2. But according to
some authorities they were the inhabitants of the Peshawar valley before the Pathán inva.
sion, and are apparently of Scythic origin and came into the Punjab with the Játs and Katti
in the 5th and 6:b centuries. They soon became powerful and important and ruled the whole
valley as far as the Indus and the foot of the northern hills. In the first half of the 18th
century the Yusufzai and Mohmand drove them across the lodus into Chach-Pakhli. But
their efforts to regain their lost territories were such a perpetual source of disturbance,
that at length Jabảngir deported them en masse and distributed them over Hindustan and
the Dakhan. Scattered families of them are still to be found along the left bank of the
Indus in Hazára and Ráwalpindi.
The Tajik are apparently the original inhabitants of Persia ; but now-a-days the word is
used throughout Afghánistán to denoto any Persian-speaking people who are not either
Sayyid, Afghán, or Hazára; much as Ját, or Hindki is used on the upper Indus to denoto
the speakers of Panjabi or its dialects. They are described by Dr. Bellow as peaceable,
industrious, faithful, and intelligent. In the villages they cultivate, and in the towns they
are artisans aad traders; while almost all the clerkly classes of Afghánistán are Tájiks.
HAZÁRA8.--Our Census figures certainly do not represent the whole number of Bazáras
in tho North-West Frontier Province and probably most of them return themselves as
Patháns simply, without specifying any tribe. The Bazáras of Kábul hayo already been
noticed. They hold the Parapomisus of the ancients, extending from Kibul and Ghazni to
Hírát, and from Kandahár to Balkh. They are almost certainly Mongol Tartars, and were
settled in their present abodes by Changiz Kbán. They have now almost wholly lost their
Mongol speech, but retain the physical and physiognomic characters of the race, and are
“as puro Mongols as when they settled 600 years ago with their families, their flocks, and
their worldly possessions." They intermarry only among themselves, and in the interior
of their territory are almost wholly independent. They are described at length by Dr.
Bellew in Chapter XIII of his Races of Afghanistán. Bir Alexander Cunningham said that
in Bábar's time the Karlúki (? Karlághi) Hazáras held the country on both banks of the
Soban in Rawalpindi; and he refers to them the well-known coins of Sri Hasan Karlúki of the
bull and horseman type, which he ascribes to the beginning of tbe 18th century. But the
descendants of these people are apparently returned as TORK8 and not as Hazáras. Their
history in the Hazára district has been sketched above. Dr. Bellow describes the Hazáras
as a “very simple-minded people, and very much in the hands of their priests. They are
for the most part entirely illiterate, aro governed by tribal and clan chiefs whoso authority
over their people is absolute, and they are generally very poor and hardy. Many thousands
of them come down to the Punjab every cold season in search of labour either on the roads,
or as well-sinkers, wall.builders, etc. In their own country they have the reputation of being
a brave and hardy race, and amongst the Afgháns they are considered a faithful, industrious
and intelligent people as servants. Many thousands of them find errployment at Kábul and
Ghazni apd Kandahár during the winter months as labourers—o the two former citios
mainly in removing the snow from the house-tops and streets. In consequence of their
boing heretics, the Sunni Afgháns hold them in slavery, and in most of the larger towns the
servant-maids are purchased slavos of this people." Thoy aro all Shias.



0152
QİDARI, QADRIA. See under Sófi.
Qárm Khání, a sept of Chauháp Rájputs found in the Bawal nizámat of
Jind and in Jaipur State and descended from Qáim Khán, a famous
convert to Islám. They are said to abstain from using planks of wood
in their doorways.
QÁIN-MAKÁM, lit. a locum tenens. A small group of Muhammadans who in
Hissár claim to be Mughals, and owe their institution to the Mughal
emperors. But in Rohtak they say they are Patháns.
QALANDAR), the Kalender of the Arabian Nights, is properly & holy
Muhammadan ascetic who abandons the world and wanders about
with shaven head and beard. But the word is generally used in
the Punjab for a monkoy-man. Some of them have a sort of pretence
to a religious character ; but their ostensible occupation is that of
leading about bears, monkeys, and other performing animals, and
they are said, like the Kanjars, to make clay pipe-bowls of superior
quality.* The numbers returned are small except in Gurgaon, where
Mr. Canning suggested, the Qalandars of the Census returns of 1881
may be the faqirs of the shrine of Shah Chokha, a saint much
venerated by the Meos ; insomuch that the abduction of a married
woman from this saint's fair is held to be allowable, Shah Chokha
being held to have given the woman to the abductor. The Qalandars
have a secret vocabulary, which includes a number of pure Persian
words. They settle most of their disputes among themselves, and conduct
their debates with great orderliness and dignity. The most famous
Qalandar shrine is that of Abu Ali' or Bá Ali Qalandar who is
buried at Panipat. Another Qalandar, Shah Báz, a notorious heretio
from Khurásán settleil in the Samah tract on the Pesháwar border.
QALHÁRÍ, & Ját clən (agricultural) found in Multán.
QáxÚNGO, lit. an exponnder of law.' The title of a family in Karnal
who were originally modis or store-keepers and also engaged in
commerce at Joli. One member of the family was appointed Qănúogo
of Karnál and the family then settled there. Originally Mahajan by
caste, its founder Maidi Mal had a son Rai Mal, ancestor of tbe present
Qánúogo family, but he subsequently embraced Islám and his son
Sbaikh Tayáb by a Muhammadan wife is said to have risen to the
rank of wazír at the Mughal court and to have obtained bis brother's
appointment as Qánúngo. Qánúngo families are also found in Hoshiar.
pur, where a family of Jírath Khatrís were once gánúngos of Bajwára
in Mughal timest: in Gujrát: in Jullundur, at which town there was
* As in Gurdaspur where their speciality is said to be a pottery made by mixing goat's
dung with clay. According to Garnett (Mysticism and Magic in Turkey), the founder of the
Qalandari Darwesh was Qalandar Yussuf Andalusi, a native of Andalusia, who was for longa
disciple of Shaikh Háji Bektash. He was, however, expelled from his brotherhood on account
of his overbearing temper and arrogant conduct. He then tried to gain admittance to the
Maulavi order, but eventually founded a brotherhood, the rules of which prescribe perpetual
wandering and eternal hatred against the orders which had rejected him. The title of
Qalandar means 'pure' and is not confined to the order.
† Macauliffe, sikh Religion, I, p. 52. For his legend, see Karnal Gazetteer, 1890, p. 100.
i Tawarikh Qaum Khatrián, p. 29.



258
Qárlúgh-Qassáb.
an old Saugal Khatri family* which held the office and is now partly
Muhammadan : in Kángra at Kotla :f at Palwal in Gurgaon ; and else.
where. The family last mentioned affects the shrine of Shaikh Ahmad
Chishti whose shrine is at Sajwári in Palwal tahsil. One of their
ancestors died at this shpine and such was his attachment to the saint
tbat until one of his fingers was cut off and buried at the shrine bis
body could not be removed and taken to the Jumna to be barnt.
QÁRLÚGA, QAR-, or QÁRLUQ, a well-known Turk tribe whose malik or chief,
Saif-ud-Din Hasan and his son Násir-ud-Din. Muhammad appear in
the account of the Mughal invasions of the Indus territories in the
period from 1221 to 1260. A.D. The former held Ghazni, Karman and
Baníán, the latter a place between Karman (Kurram) and the Jhelum
and not far from the banks of the Indus, but hitherto not identified.
To it Saif-ud-Din retired when driven from Ghazni and Karman, and
his son became a vassal of the Mughals, retaining the khittah of
Baníán which Raverty located on the east bank of the Indus. The
khittah probably extended as far porth as Pakhli in Hazára where the
Qárlóghs were probably reinforced by Timur's ming or hazárah. The
Qarlúghs declined before the Afghán inroads, but in 1786-7 Timur
Shah Durráni reinstated the headman of the Turki patti and Mánakrai
in those possessions and a few of this Turkish race were at the British
annexation still settled at Mánakrai, a little to the east and south of
Haripur, and in Agror. :
Qasái, a cotton-comber. The Qasáis have several sections, Arbi Bhatti,
Bhatta, Khokhar, Goráha, Thahím, Tbahím-Ansari and Súhal. The
Bhatta say they used to be mulláhs until their territory was invaded
when they said they were Qasáis. The caste' is further cross-divided
into two occupational groups, the Bákarit who sell goat's flesh and
deal with Hindus, and the Pinjáras or cotton-cleaners. These two
groups do not intermärry or hold any social intercourse with each other
as a rule. The Qasái almost certainly overlap the QASSÁB, if indeed
the two names are not identical. See also Penja. The Persian trans-
lation of Qasái is Naddáf.
Qasnána, a Kbarral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
QASRÁNI, QAISARÁNI: See Kasráni (Baloch).
QASSÁB.-A butcher who slaughters after the Muhammadan fashion, dresses
the carcase and sells the meat. But in Karnál the Qassáb is often a
market gardener. In Rohtak the butcher class is the very worst
in the District, and is noted for its callousness in taking human life,
and general turbulence in all matters. A proverb says: "He who bas
not seen a tiger bas still seen a cat. He also has not seen a Thag har
still seen a Qassáb."
In Kapurthala the Qassábs have two territorial groups; (i) the Lahore
who immigrated there under Rai Ibrahim, (ii) the Shaikhoparia who
came from Shaikhopur under Rájá Fateh Singh. The village or Doábia
But ibutchers in taking a
o This appears to be distinct from the Qanungo family at Ráhon, originally Khi Khatris
but now Muhammadan by creed : P. N. Q. I. $ 478.
+ Tawarikh Rajag.in i: Kángya, by Díwán Sarb Diál, Kángra, 1883.
* Fr. bakra, goat. Also termed Shaikh out of respect. The Qasáís who do not kill cows
call themselves Sikkhú, or to distinguish more exactly mekn.sikkhú (from mékni, a goat)
as opposed to thakkar sikkhú (from bhakkar, a bull, cow or buffalo). They have a secret
vocabulary.



Qawwal-Qizilbásh.
259
Qassábs form & third group, rarely connected with the two former
by marriage. The Lahori were originally Bhatti Rajputs, converted
to Islám under Akbar: while the Shaikhopuria were Khokbars.
Both are in practice endogamous. No outsiders are admitted into
the caste—not even an apprentice who has been taught butchering,
The Qassáb would certainly appear to be sometimes identical with
the Qasái. Thus the Bhatti (or Bhutti) Qasábs of Jhang are cotton-
combers. They observe the jhand ceremony in front of a mosque, gu?
worth five annas and 21 sers of chúrí (bread baked with ghi and sugar)
being distributed. In Gurgaon the beopári or dealer'in cattle is said
to be a butcher also. These dealers are very numerous about Firozpur
Jhirka in the south of that District. They are probably Meos by origin.
QawwÁL, See ander MIRÁsi.
Qizi, a Muhammadan law-doctor who gives opinions on all religious and
legal questions. The descendants of a famous Qázi often retain the
title and there are several well-known Qázi families. In Dera Gházi
Khán the Qázis are said to be all Awáns, and the more important among
them call themselves Ulamá. The Qázis do not claim descent from one
and the same ancestor. During the times of the Musalmán kings of
Delhi some men were appointed judges of the Muhammadan Law, and
their descendants continue to practise as expounders of its tenets.
Qázı SHAIKA Rázo (-RÁJO), a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
QIZIL- OR QAZAL-BÁSH-(Turki qizil 'red,' and básh, 'head.')—The Qizil-básh
are supposed to be descendants of the captives given to Shaikh
Haidar the Safawi* by Tímúr. They wore the red caps assumed
by those captives as a mark of distinction and were considered the
best troops in the Persian armies. Ibbetson described them as &
tribe of Tartar horsemen from the Eastern Caucasus, who formed
the backbone of the old Persian army and of the force with which
Nádir Shah invaded India. Many of the great Mughal ministers were
Qizilbásh and notably Mír Jumla, the famous minister of Aurangzeb.
The red cap of peculiar shape, which they wear, was invented by
the founder of the Sophi dynasty of Persia, an intolerant Shiá, as
the distinguishing mark to that sect, and which his son Shah
Tahmásp compelled Humáyún to wear when a refugee at the Persian
Court. There are some 1,200 families of Qizilbásh in the city of
Kábul alone, where they were located by Nadir Shah, and still form
an important military colony and exercise considerable influence in
local politics. They are not uncommon throughout Afghánistán. See
also under Ghulam. Ferishtat appears to assign to the Kazilbásh a
much earlier origin than any other writer, for he mentions the
“Túrkmans of Kandahár, called Kazilbásh, owing to their wearing red
caps,” under the year 1044 A.D. 1
The Shaikh Haidar alluded to must be the Safavid who was fourth in descent from
Shaikh Safi and added the role of warrior to the profession of saint: S. Lano-Poole's
Mohammadan Dynasties, p. 255.
+ Briggs' Mahomedan Power in India, p. 121.
* Kizzilbásh is also described an 'offensive nickname' given by the Turks to the Bektash
of Cappadocia, Shias in faith, or with a curiously composite religion. The Bektashis are
followers of Háji Bektásh who blessed the Janissaries when that corps was enrolled by the
Amir Orchan and it remained closely associated with the order found by that famous saint:
Garnett's Mysticism and Magic in Turkey, pp. 18 and (for the doctrines of the Bektesh)
111.4.



260
Qom-Qureshi.
ape often possSuch are tho are knoopt of Griot
Qom, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
QURAISHI, QURAISH, was the tribe to which the Prophet belonged. The word
is said to mean trader.* But a learned maulavi in Jhang declares that
the name is derived from qarsh, a marine animal hunted by the Quresh
or Quraish. Owing to its lofty origin the Quraish is a favourite
tribe from which to claim descent, and it is to be feared that
comparatively few of those who return themselves as Quraishi bave
any real title to the name. The true Qureshis of the south-western
districts, however, are often possessed of great influence, and hold
a high character for sanctity. Such are the descendants of Bahá-ul-
haqq the renowned saint of Multán, who are known as Hashmi
Qureshis, and whose family is described at pages 490ff of Griffin's
Panjab Chiefs. They are chiefly found in the Multán, Jhang, and
Muzaffargarh districts. Among those who style themselves Quraish
many belong to the Farúqis or descendants of Umar, the second
Caliph, or to the Sadiqis or descendants of Abu Bakar, the first Caliph,
both of whom belonged to the Quraish tribe. But the term Sadiqi is
often confused with SIDQI.
In Jhang the Quraishis aro divided into the following eight families
or septs :-
Hásbami, from Hásham. I Shaikh.
Bodla, 9. v.
Abbássi, from Abbás.
Mírán.
Alláhbeli.
Shabána.
Hársi, from Háris.
The Allábbeli were so named by a faqir who blessed them with the
words: Alláhbeli, 'may God be your friend.' The Háshamis take
wives from the other septs, but do not bestow daughters outside their
town sept. Similarly the Shahána and Abbássi only give daughters to
the Háshami and take brides from the other sépts, but otherwise give
none in return. The Quraishi give daughters to Sayyids. The
Hársis claim to be Quraishis has been disputed, but those of Haweli
Babádur Shah and Garh Maháráj or Pír Abdur Rahmán are of some
importance. The flársis too sometimes claim to be endogamous.
The Quraishi in Multán are confined mainly to the families of Bahawal
Hagg at Multán, the guardians of the shrine at Makhdum Rashid, and
their immediate connections.f Several tribes, e.g., the Langriál also
claim Quraish origin. The Quraishi appear to have entered Multán
in the 13th century A, D. and their proselytizing movements throw
some light on the tribal arrangements of the day.
* Amir Ali, Spirit of Islám, p. 61, derives it from qarasha, to trade. The sanctity of tho
tribe dates from 440 A.D., or nearly two centuries before the Prophet's power reached its
zenith, in which year Koshai acquired for his family'the guardianship of the Ka'bah -tho
four-square sacred stone at which the gazelle was sacred-at Mecca. Before the birth of
Muhammad two rival factions were formed, the Hashmites and the Umawiyah, and the feud
passed on from generation to generation. . Muhammad was a descendant of Hisham and bis
bitterest opponents were the men of the Umawiyah party, who after his death re-opened the
feud and eventually killed the sons of Ali.
+ Multán Gazetteer, 1902, p. 128 and p. 166.
Ibid., p. 144



es to actreach out in i seized and all on pitbild totho
Qurejah-Qureshi.
261
The Háns in Montgomery also claim to be Quraishi but the history
of the tribe shows how the claim arose. Under Alamgir Shaikh Qutb
Háns, a learned man and apparently a teacher of some of the nobility
at Delhi obtained a grant of several villages in táluka Qutbábád. The
Háns were then simple land-holders, living a little to the north-west
of Pákpattan. Shaikh Qutb became powerful, owing to his ability and
influence at court, and wealthy, as the Pára, Sobág and Dhaddar
streams flowed throogh his lands. The tappa or tract of the Háns
was transferred by Alamgir from the pargana of Kabúla to that of
Alamgirpor. At the downfall of the Mughal empire Shaikh Qutb's
descendant made himself independent and about 1764 Muhammad
Azim was chief of the clan. He seized as much of the country round
Malika Háns as he could, but in 1766 the Sikhs overran it and took
him prisoner by treachery. His brother is said to have called in the
Bahrwal Sikhs to assist him, promising them half his territory, but
instead of helping him against his rival, the diwán of Pákpattan,
they put down cow-killing and the call to prayer, and so he called in
the Dogars, and drove out the Sikhs. But about this time the streams
which watered his lands had dried up and he was unable to resist the
Sikhs when they returned and he had to seek refuge with the díwán of
Pakpattan. But this account is far from satisfactory as it is irreconcil.
able with the received chronology of Sikh historians. However this
may be it is clearly possible that the Háns are, as they claim to be,
Quraishi by descent and that Shaikh Qutb owed his position at Delhi
to that fact, and obtained a grant for his family or tribe on that
account.*
Certain holy clans also claim Quraishi descent. Such are the
KIAdgat and the CAISATI. The latter claim to be Farúqi Quraishi
as descendants of the Caliph Umr. The most illustrious descendant
of Abu Izhák, their founder, was Bábá Farid Shakarganj, the saint
of Pakpattan, and his descendants are the diwáns of that shrine.
The Bodlas also claim Quraishi origin.
QUREJAH, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
QURESHI, an Awán clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
* Monty. Gazetteer, 1899, pp. 35-38 and 86.
+ See Vol. II, p. 489. Khagga means a kind of fish, but ghag also means a 'stream,'
according to Purser, Montgomery Sett. Rep., p. 14.



268
RABÁBI (), a player on the rabáb (a violin with three strings) : 886 under
Mirasi.
RABÁNA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
RABEBA, one of the priocipal muhins or clans of the Kharrals, with its head.
quarters at Fatehpur in Montgomery : classed as agricultural.
RAD, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Rá Deo, Rájá Deo, the people of Malána, a village in Kullu, separate from
the main valley. The village gives its name to the valley, the Malána
Nál, in which it lies. Malána is said to be so called from Malánu,
a Thákur, brother of Jána (Jána is a hamlet in Nagar Kothi), who
ruled over Malána some time after its foundation.
Tradition says that a band of hunters came to the valley, and having
eaten food on the spot where the temple now is, went on to hunt.
The fragments of bread left behind sprang up into a crop of corn,
and seeing this on their return the hunters knew that the deota had
taken them under his special protection. They remained and founded
Malána. It is a large village of some 300 or 400 souls, lying in a
remote valley east of the Beas. The village consists of two main behrs
or quarters, the first called Sara behr, on the east, and the second
Dbárá behr, on the west side. Sara behr again really includes two
smaller but ill-defined behry, and is occupied by the Nagwánis (from
Nagoni in Kothi Naggar)* and the Sarwálas (from Sar in Kothi Kais).
The Nagwánís are the pujáris of the temple, and the Sarwalas are the
guardians of the sar or baoli of the Deota Jamlu, their behr being close
to it. They carry loads and do other work for the Rá Deo. Dhára behr
also consists of threu minor behrs, those of the Thamiáni, Pachiání and
Dharani chugs or families respectively. These came from Thale, in
Bárágarh Kothi, from Pos in Kanáwar Kothit and from Dhará in Kais
Kothi. The Thamiáni correspond to the Bháts or lower grade of
pujáris in Kullu and usually intermarry with the Nagwánis. The
Pachiánis are tenants of the deota and tbe Dharani are bearers of the
silver maces, in common use in all ceremonies, which they carry beforu
the deota.
Sir James Lyall writes :-
“The hamlet consists of two quarters, one of which lies rather higher up the hill side
than the other, which contains the buildings sacred to the god. The men of the uppor
quarter take brides from the lower, and vice versa. This custom of intermarriage they
allege to be due not to exclusiveness on their part, but to their inability to pay the consider.
ation for a betrothal which is demanded by the parents of girls in the other parts of Kullu,
while there is no demand for their own marriageable girls among the marrying men of
Kullu."
The Malána people admit themselves to be Kanets, but they are
too much under the deota's protection to intermarry with any Kullu
Kanets, though occasionally they take wives from Rasol, not, however,
• The kothi in Kullu is a collection of hamlets rather than a village.
+ Thio Kanáwar Kotbi in Kullu must not be confused with Kanaur in Basbahr.



264
The Ha-deo of Malána.
giving women to the Rasol men in return. Rasol is a remote village
not far from another Malána in Kanáwar Kothi. In Rasol there is a
the based on the return the promotion page
large måfi of Jamlu. It is curious that the Dhára behr people
admit themselves to be Rao or inferior Kanets, the Sara behr men
alono claiming to be Khash or superior Kanets.
The only exogamous rule is a vague one, the idea being that relatives
within seven degrees may not marry. But this only applies to agnatic.
kinship, regard being paid to the haddi ka nátha, not to the dudh ka
nálha.
• Widows can take a man to live with him, but do not marry a second
time. An informal feast is beld to celebrate the occasion. Adultery
is not, of course, severely punished, Rs. 20 being the asual price
being paid for another man's wife, or Rs. 40 if there is onmity
between the husband and the seducer. It may be noted that there are
fixed rates for all dealings between Malána men, and those can only
be exceeded when trading with outsiders.* A woman who escapes into
the Nagwan behr or Thamián behr cannot be, arrested. If & wronged
husband refuses to accept Rs. 20 as damages for losing his wife the
seducer can take refuge in the Nagwán or Thamián behr. If he does
this he must be protected by the Rá Deo who deduct Rs. 5 from the
fine of Rs. 20 and credit it to the god's account, the husband being
given only Rs. 15 instead of Rs. 20, because he has refused to aot in
accordance with rule.
Euch class burns its dead separately in defined spots. The ashes are
simply left there. The Brahmans of Harkandi are the prohits of Malána,
and in every respect their customs seem to tally with those of Kulla
generally. They do not know the Malána tongue. The lohárs of Malána
village itself, who beat the drams in Jamla's band, do not understand the
Malắna language.
The whole concourse of the men of Malána are themselves an em.
bodiment of the deo: such concourse is called the Rá Deo. The
kárdárs, chelas, pujárís, etc., in fact all the office-bearers, are all
Maláną Kanets, who are appointed from time to time from among
themselves by the Malána men. This body of officials, when they go
their rounds to collect revenue fees, etc., are known as the bári, in
distinction to the grand host of Malána, the Rá Deo.
The deota has first a karmisht (= the Kulu kárdár or steward), and
this term seems peculiar to Jamlo's managers, second, & chief and
assistant pujári and a gur or chela. In addition there are eight
jațheras, electedt every one or two years, who call the villagers to
work for the deota. Any one absent a whole day is fined annas 4 (or
twice the amount imposed for refusing to do Government work). The
signal for the closing of the attendance roll is the throwing down of
a small stick (kandiáli).
* These are old rates and it is stated have never been changed. Wheat is bhar per rupos.
Barley and buckwheat & bhar per rupee. A bhar is a seed measure containing 16 pathas and
a patha is roughly a ser and a quarter of barley and a ser and a half of wheat
+ According to Sir James Lyall tha Rá Deo appoint tho council of 8 jathoras, or jurymon,
and they decide all disputes which ariso among the peoplo of Malina, their decision is
Dovor questioned, and our courts are never troubled with cases from the village.



The Ra-deo of Malâna.
265
All the Rá Deo, except a few mon, old women and children, cross the
pass in the end of Maghar or beginning of Poh, and spend more than a
month in the villages in Kulu containing land assigned to their god,
billeting themselves on every house. In the same way at other times
the Rá Deo visits for a few days Buladi and Bishna, two villages in
Kothi Kais, where it borders on Malána, which are held by the deo,
and at other times the villages in Harkandi which are assigned to it.
The bari, i.e. the band of office-bearers, pays separate and more free
quent visits, the Rá Deo only visits large villages which can support it.
During these visits all the Malána men feed free at the expense of their
hosts, but no doubt their food is considered in the accounts of the
revenue taken with more or less accuracy. Some of the Malána men
are detached in parties to visit the other shrines of Jamlu in Kulu,
which are separate from the Malána shrine. These parties get food
free for a few days. The bari also makes rounds to the other Jamlu
temples; when it comes a goat is killed and a feast held, and some eight
annas are paid as a tribute. The zamíndárs of all this part of the
country commonly put aside a few sers of rice to give to the bari when
it comes round, none of the Malána men can read or write, they profess
to keep accounts from memory only. Some of them come with the bari
as porters to carry the rents, which are paid in grain back to Malána.
The Malána karmisht keeps Kulu accountants in the Kulu villages
where Jamlu has muáfis and these keep the rent rolls in the various
muáfis. The Malána people do not give any accurate detail of how their
grain is expended, but at the fairs (melas) held at Malána all comers
are fed free as long as the fairs last.
The Malána folk have good flocks of sheep and goats, which they
barter for rice at an annual fair held at Naggar. They are not liked,
but dreaded to some extent as uncanny by the other Kulu people.
Since the approach to their glen from the Beas valley was so far. im.
proved in 1883 under the influence of Mr. L. W. Dane, Assistant Com.
missioner, as to be traversed by a mule battery, they have become much
more amenable to anthority. Jamlu is said to be the bhái (not
necessarily brother) of devi Hirma, of Gyephan, the god of a snowy
peak in Láhul, visible from parts of the Beas valley, and of Jaghtham
deota of Barshaini in Kaná war, but as to the parentage of any of the
three history is silent. Hirma, Gyephan and Jamlu are supposed not
to have dirided their property. But Jaghtham and Jamlu have sepa-
rated their joint property having been partitioned, Jamlu taking the
ilága west of Manikaran and Jaghtham the ilúqa east of that place, a
curiously modern fable! There is a peculiar custom in connection with
the worship of Jamlu, namely, the dedication to him of a handmaiden
(called Sita), taken from a family of the Nar caste resident at Manikaran.
The handmaid is presented as a husband to the god at a festival (kaika),
which occurs at irregular intervals of several years, on the first of Bhá-
dron. On dedicariou to the god the girl, who is four or five years old,
receives a gift of a complete set of valuable ornaments from the shrine.
She remains in her parents' house, getting clothes and ornaments at
intervals. If she goes to Malána she is fed. She does nothing in the
way of worship of Jamlu. When she is 15 or 16 years old a new hand-
maiden is appointed in her place. She is supposed to be really a virgin
while she is Jaulu's wife.



266
The Ra-deo of Malána.
Jamlu was much feared in the Raja's time; on his account Malána
was a city of refuge, whence no criminal could be carried off if he got
there. Again, Jamlu neither paid tribute to the Rugnáth temple at
Sultanpur nor attended at that temple his respects on the Dasehra, as
most other Kulu deotas were compelled to do. Again the Malápa men,
who are all under his special protection, were allowed great license,
they used to say that the other deotas' temples were their deo's dogris,
or out-houses, and help tbemselves to anything they admired in them.
Their god has strong prejudices against use of liquor, even for medi-
cinal purposes, and also against vaccination, but the village was more
than decimated by small-pox early in the decade 1880-1890, and in
1889 all the inhabitants cheerfully submitted to be vaccinated. Since
then they have got vaccinated regularly, but only because Government
wishes this. To get vaccinated was considered, however, a sio ful thing,
though it is now denied by the karmisht that this prejudice ever existed.
The buildings of Jamlu are all said to face north-west, but this is
doubtful.* The pindi or image is a high rounded stone. He-goats and
raws (even though castrated) are sacrificed to him, but she-goats, etc.,
are only offered to Ranka Devi, his wife. Jamlu is said to be the Hindu
Jamdxggan. Mr. G. M. Young records a theory that Jarlu is Jaimal
Khan, the Mugbal general. Ke has temples in Spiti, Ladakh, and in
many places in Kulu, but most of the latter are simply resting places of
the Malánu Jamla.
The chief buildings are a granary for storing the grain rents of the
land assigned to the god, a house entered only on tbe occasion of one
of the annual fairs and kept barred during the rest of the year, &
building within which barley is sown fifteen days before that fair, so
that the blancbed shoots may be offered to the god at the fair (this
offering, called jari, is made to other deotas as well as Jamlu, and the
young shoots are worn by the men in their caps at most fairs), and an
edifice built for the custody of a golden image of an elephant, which
image was presented by the emperor Akbart according to the tradition
in recognition of an oracular revelation of the god that led to the curo
of a deformity in the person of the emperor's daughter. There is thus
do temple, in the proper sense of the word, at Malána, though there
are teinples dedicated to Jablu in many villages throughout Kulu ;
the god is supposed to dwell on the inaccessible mountain at the head
of the glen, whence he rarely, if over, descends. It is for this reason,
perhaps, that there is no idol ropresenting the deota.
In case of the slightest injury to the building, it must be entirely
rebuilt withio eight days, the workers not coming into contact with
outsiders or women and eating but once a day. A Thawi or masou
* Mr. G. M. Young says :- The main buildings are arranged round three sides of a square,
all facing inwards as far as I remember. There is a flat low stone in the grave whoro tho
great puja takes place, from which the snow is swept away first before tho puja. Jamlu is
supposed to come to this stone to receive a kbar's homage. There is no image, or stono, I
believe, in the temple. There is a very similar stone, called Jagatipat, in Nagar Castle.
+ The image is a statuette of a male figure, supposed to be Akbar. It may be gilt, but
not'I should say gold There is a building into which it and a number of tiny images of
horses, elephants, (said to be Akbar's gift) are placed on the night before the great puja.
In the rest of the year these images aro all kept by the pujári in the bhandár where he lives,
(G, M. Y.)



The Ra-deo of Malána.
267
has to be got elsewhere, but he must have been guilty of noimmorality
(with a lower caste woman).
Two ceremonial feasts are held in his honour, the first in Phágan
and the second in Sáwan, each lasts abont a week. The first is when
the chief puja takes place and the second is the Malána játra or regular
fair at which there is a large attendance of pilgrims, many of whom
present otferings, the prescribed form of which is a small silver model
of a borse or of an elephant. These offeringg* are afterwards melted
down, and shaped into larger statuettes of one or other of these
animals or into whistles or other furniture for worsbip. There are now
5 elephants, 11 horses, 1 deert and an umbrella in the storehouse, The
sheep and goats sacrificed at the fairs are slaughtered in a style
resembling that followed by Muhammadans rather than the Hindu
fashion, and this has given rise to a belief in some parts of Kulu that
the deota is a Musalmán.
Once a month and sometimes more, there are uchhabs, or feasts,
which are attended mainly by the Malána med alone. Any sádhu or
beggar who visits Malána gets food and a blanket if he wants it. Such
visitors are not very numerons, owing to the difficulty of the roads.
The Malána people, in common with all the Kulu tribes, are also
firm believers ir. demons, etc. There are many in the valley. Dánu
Bhút signifies his wrath by a gale of wind. Be dwells on the
mountains west of tbe valley, and waylays men in the shape of
a bear or an ox or a tree, and once a man has seen him the
man's heart is filled with a growing fear which kills him in time most
certainly, even if a goat is sacrificed to the Bhút.
Banu Bhút lives in the Dúgher thâcht. About 1892 he came down
with such force that he brought down a large devidiár or juniper tree
which is still shown, and damaged Jamlu’s temple. Jamlu has a sheep
sacrificed to him.
Jogni is a devi who attacks men who go up to the high ranges with
too many flowers in their caps or in gaudy clothes. Illness follows,
and to cure it a chelu (kid), not black in colour, must be sacrificed
very early in the morning on the roof of the house. (This is the
regular Jogni Deota of Kulu).
The Malána people have the usual Bulu household gods, viz., the
Bastar Deo or Dwelling god of the foundation stone, before whom &
sprig of yew (rakhal) is placed, and the Thán Deo, outside the house,
to whom pinds of four, etc., are offered on the first day of harvest.
In certain villages, 6. g. in Kanáwar, there are Than Deotas with
regular temples. Lastly, there is the Patal Deota, who is also placed
outside the house and goes with the sheep to the Alpine pastures. He
to the new yew (rakhawelling god ove tual Rule
* Jamlu Deota has many other fairs, a Phagli játra in Phagan, a Shami játra early in
Bhadon, a Jitryirshu in Chet and a Kaurvirshu ion 17th Baisákh)-i.e., the great and
small virshus or festivals. In addition there is the fair of Ranka Devi, Jamlu's wife, on
17th Chet. These, of course, do not include the kais or expiatory sacrifices, which take
place mostly by the Deota's special orders. A very great one took place in 1883, after the
mountain battery marching through the valley had killed some cows. The people of Malána
(and of Nagar too) made images of cows and paid huge sacrifices to them.
+ The karmisht told Mr. G. M. Young that he did not know the exact number,
| Thach, a gathering place for flocks in the upper pastures.



268
Rafizi
Rági.
is worshipped by the phwáls ? or shepherds under the form of a trident
(tarshil) on first going to the pastures and on returning home.
In a few other details the Malána people differ from those of Knlu.
They are not compelled to wash their hands before touching food
because they scrupulously avoid contact with low castes. The kárdár
and chela do not plough land, do not smoke. tobacco, and must not
remain near any corpse even if the corpse is one of the family, and will
not use skins to cross rivers. The ceremony of dedicating the bair of
the bead (mundan) is called pas in Malána, and the Karmisht, pujáris
and gur have been exempted from it. Similarly there are no cere-
monies at betrothal or marriage, the Deota's consent being merely
asked and Re. 1 paid to the girl's father at betrothal. Marriage
occurs when the girl is from 15 up to 25. The Malána people only
performs the Sradh ceremonies on the last of the 16 days of the
Krishnapaksh in a soj. The Dágis* in the village are forbidden to
approach the temple.
The Malána people are by some considered to be superior physically
to those of Klu, but there are a few le pers among them, drie
probatly to inter-breeding. It may be that their physical qualities and
their exclusiveness are due to ibe fact that they (and the Rasol
people) have never been contaminated by intercourse with, the Sikbs,
etc., who overran Kulu, and whose invasion brought venereal diseases
into the bills. It seems curious that Kulu women are so despised by
them. They resemble the Kulu people in admittedly allowing two
brothers to possess a common wife. They say, however, that more than
two do not do so.
The dialect spoken in Malána has some afficities with that spoken in
Kanaur, but little with the dialects of Lahul or the Tibetan of Spiti.
It is called Kanashi. The land revenue of all the hamlets in the Maláda
valley is assigned to the temple of Jamlu.
Rafizi, pl. Rawáriz, 'forsaker,' deserter,' a term properly applied to a sect
of Shias who deserted Zaid, the grandson of Ali, because he refused
to curse the first two Khalifas; but in the Punjab, at any rate, it is a
general term applied by outsiders to any class of Shía.
RAGHA, & sept of Rajputs, closely akin to the Játus (q. v.). Hissár Gazetteer.
RAGHÓBAŅsí, RAGHBANSI, 'a descendant of Raghu,' a branch of the Rájputs.
They are, perhaps, most numerous in the eastern part of the Uoited
Provinces. In the Punjab they are chiefly found in the Hill States
and the sub-montane of Gurdaspur and Sialkot, though there are a few
in the Jumpa districts also. But the name would appear to imply little
more than traditional origin. Thus the Haghbansi in Gurdaspur and
Sialkot are now Manhás by tribe. In Hoshiarpur the Bohwá Rájputs
call themselves Raghúbansí, and say they came from Jaipur and
Jodhpur.
Rági, a Sikh title: a musician: fr. râg, a mode or time. Also · described as
a Ját sub-caste.t
* They cannot speak the Malána tongue, although they can understand it. They are not
forbidden to speak it. Foreigners who graze their flocks with the Malána flocks can
understand and speak the Malána language.
† Punjab Census Report, 1912, p. 431.



Ragyál-Rahbári.
269
RAGYÁL, a Rájpat clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Rabal. A Ját clan found in Nábha. It claims Rajput descent, having
become Ját by adopting widow remarriage. Their ancestor was born
on the way (ráh) when his mother was taking her husband's food to
the field. They wear a janeo at marriage, but remove it afterwards,
and reverence a sati's shrine at Hallotali in Amloh nizámat
RABÁN, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
RAHBARI,* & caste of Hindu camelmen, hunters and drivers. Their story is
that when Shiva created the camel he made a man out of his sweat to
look after it.t When he grew up the man demanded a wife, so Shiva
bade bin bring a fairy's clothes from a bank where Indra's parís were
wont to bathe. The man brought him the clothes of two fairies, so
Shiva gave him one to wife, and bestowed the other on a charan (Bhát).
The camelman's wife bore hin 7 daughters and a son named Sámar.
The girls were given to Rajput husbands who founded as many Rahbari
gots and the son founded the Sámar got. The Rahbáris have two
groups Máru and Pitalia. The latter is found in Jaisalmír, whence the
Rahbaris originally came, I and owes its name to the fact that its women
may not wear ornaments made of any metal save brass.
The Márú Rabbáris do not even smoke with the Pitaliá, as they regard
them as their inferior. Still less do these two sub-castes intermarry.
Rahbári women wear a distinctive dress : their ivory banglesg recall
their Rájput origin, silver bangles being a sign of widowhood; their
gowns are of specially stainped cloth, of three varieties, matra, lasári
and gaichi, no other being used; the head is covered with a chíndári,
not with coloured or white cloth. Upmarried girls alone wear the
kurta, women the angia.
The Rahbári gots in Jind include:
Al.
Bhúnhalia.
Haun.
Lángas.
Bár.
Chaulána.
Kálar.
Mahiwán.
Bhati.
Chubán,
Kangal.
Makwáná.
Bhim.
Dhógal.
Khátána.
Páſhka.
Bhokia.
Gaihar.
Kiramța.
Paswála.
Bhoku.
Ghangar.
Kohlá.
Pokha.
Sámar.
In Nábha, however, the gots of each group are said to be separate.
The Márú are said to have 120 gots, including the Rájput sept-name
of Bhatti, Chauhan, Panwar and Tanór, which indicate a Rájput
origin.
* Probably from rahwár, quick-paced, active.
Another version is that Bhiva made Párbati look after it until one day she refused to do
80 any longer, so he made a doll of dab grass, put life into it and entrusted the camel to his
care.
| These are presented to the bride' by the bridegroom's father.
$ The Rahbáris probably came from Bikánír and Jodhpur with Rájput princesses who
married Mughal princes, They were skilled camel-keepers, which the Muhammadans wora
not, and a story goes that once, when camel's milk was prescribed for a Jodhpur princess
at Akbar's court, no one could mill. a she-camel except a Rahbari.



270
The Rahbaris.
The gots are divided into nakhs named from ancestors.
Got.
Nakhs.
AL
...
Bhattit
Koja* ..
• All found in Nábha.
Mehun m.
(Raslat ...,
Bhím
(none).
Ghangal
(Beka.
Songra
Gujar.
(Ghia,
Chaupaní.
Tanur
... Madhani.
(Paraní.
Generally 4 gots are avoided in marriage and widow remarriage 18
allowed. I No janeo is worn, but Rájputs, Ahírs, Játs and Gújars way
drink water at their hands. Rájputs, however, do not smoke with a
Rahbárí.
Cults.--A Rahbárí boy is baptised either at birth or marriage by a
Bairági, who ties a kanthi round the boy's neck, is fed and given a
rupee. Thenceforward he is the boy's gurú. The first tonsure is
performed at a place chosen by the barber.
The Rahbárís of Jind and Sangrúr tahsils are followers of Báwás
Mast Náth and Chait Náth, the famous Jogis of Bohar near Rohtak,
which shrine most of them visit on Chait 9th badi. The wealthy present
camels, others money to the shrine.
In the Bágar the Rahbárís affect Pabupál, brother of Busá, Rathor
Rájput, and sing his sáka or epic.
Unlike most other Hindus Rahbáris will lop leaves from a pical to
feed their camels. They do not reverence their animals on the Diwali
night, but light lamps at the place where they are tethered.
Wedding ceremonies.--The Rahbáris have few distinctive observances
at weddings. At betrothal a barber, a mirási and a Brahman are sont
to the bridegroom's father to apply for tilak. This is followed by the
lagan and then the wedding party sets out and generally arrivés next
morning. It waits for the bride's father to arrive with his brotherhood
outside the village gates, and he brings boiled rice and sugar with
which the bridegroom's party is feasted. The bridegroom's father pays
Rs. 7 at this visit of which Re. 1 is given to a mirási, Re. 1 to a barber
and Rs. 5 are kept by the bride's father. A ceremony, called tahurti
chatan cháti, is performed before the pherás, at which the bride's father
pays Rs. 20, or as much as he can afford, to the bridegroom. .
At night the wedding party is entertained with porridge in which ghi
is poured when eaten.
mn This nakh will not wear a silver waist-belt, as other Rahbáris do, bocauso thoir
ancostor who wore one died on a pilgrimage to the Ganges.
+ This should be Bhátí according to the Rohtak note.
* The Rabbáris of Nábha observe it at Bohar in Alwar, at the shrine of Sedá faqir.
But only with the husband's younger brother, not with the jeth or older. -(Rohtak).



Rahdári-Rajoa.
871
On the departure of the party, which takes place after three days,
the bride's father puts a necklace of camel-dung on the bridegroom
and also gives him a rosary of the same material. In return for this
the other party gives cash, etc.
RAHDÁRí, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
RAHELÁ, RAHELLÁ, see Rohilla.
Rání, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
RABÍMEKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
RAHITWÁ, •BÁ, fem. -1., a foundling : one who enters into a state of voluntary
slavery: a term applied to certain prostitutes and their descendants :
Panjabi Dicty., p. 945.
RAHMANKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
RAHOLA, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán..
RAHTOR, spine,' a Rájput clan. Cf. Kachhwáha 'tortoise, 'and Sisodia,'hare.'
P. N. Q. II, 654.
Rabu, a sept of Kanets, which holds Barmher.pargana in Dhámí State.
Rakú, a class of Kanets which is also called Kuran in Bashahr. In Kulu
they are called by both names.
Ráí, (1) a Ját clán (agricultural) found in Amritsar, and also in Sialkot
where they claim descent from Jogra, like the Kang; (2) an agricul.
tural clan found in Shahpur; (3) see under Bhát and Mirásí.
RAIBDÁR, a tribe of Játs found in Gurgaon. It is famous for its stupidity
and other Játs tell many amusing stories at its expense.
RAIN, (1).= ARAIN : (2j a tribe of Játs found in Jind. Mansa Rám is their
sidh. His samadh is at Buriá, and they offer him 4 loaves and sweet
porridge at a wedding and also the first milk of a cow on the 2nd,
10th and 15th sudi of each month. Also found in Ludhiana, in which
District they cut the jandi tree at a wedding, and play with the twigs
chhitián." A barber woman puts & rupee in a tray (parát), and
whichever gets it first is considered lucky.
Rás, the title given by the guilds of bricklayers and masons of the towns to
their head men, and is consequently often used to denote all who follow
those occupations. Mihmár is the corresponding Persian word. It
is probably the name of an occupation rather than of a true caste, the
real caste of these men being said to be almost always Tarkhán. The
Ráj is returned only for the eastern and central districts, and seems to
be generally Musalmáņ save in Delhi, Gurgaon and Kangļa. Batahra
appears to be a synonym for Ráj in Jullundur and Amritsar, but in
Chamba the Batahra seems to be a true caste, working generally ao
stone-masons and carpenters, and not uofrequently cultivating
land. In Kulu, however, the Batahra is said to be a Koli by caste
who has taken to slate quarrying,
RAJÁDEKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
RÁJAR, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
RÁJAĶ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
RÁJIHANS, Rájkumar, Rajshahi or Thákar.
RAJOA,-(Multáni),
an independent olan. Panjabi Dicty., p. 948.
Cf. Rajwa,
sidh. His samagedding and alocht. Also found in olay with the twigana



272
The Rájputs.
RÁJPUT,* fem, -NÍ. Iu the Vedic literature the term Rájá-putra, son of
a Rájan' or king, was apparently used in its literal sense, though it
may also be capable of a wider interpretation. Later the Rájáputra
degenerates into a mere landowner't and possibly is identifiable
with the Rájanga or noble. As stated in the article on the Khatris
the Rájput was a later development than the Kshatriya. I Indeed,
if a conjecture be permissible, the rise of the Rájput represents the
change from the ancient Vedic system of administration to a ruler
aod more feudal type of society under which a hereditary nobility
replaced the more bureaucratic Kshatriya. In the article on the Ját are
reproduced Sir Denzil Ibbetson's views as to the identity of Ját and
Rajput stock as it stands at present, and as to bow the Rájputs really
consist of the royal families of that stock. It might perhaps be said
that a Rájput tribe is not necessarily descended from a ruling chief or
sovereign, but that the rise to political power or independence of a
member of a tribe tended to promote his collateral kinsiaen as well as
his direct descendants to the status of Rajput. Sir Denzil Ibbetson
might well, as he thought, have gone further and said that a tribo of
any caste whatever, which had in ancient times (or even in com-
paratively modern times) possessed supreme power throughout any
fairly extensive tract of country would be classed as Rájput. It seemed
to him almost certain that that some of the so-called Rájput families
were aboriginal, and he instanced the Chandel. A very similar process
has gone on all thruugh the Himalayas from Chitral to Nepál,ll
especially in the Kángra and Kulu hills. In the latter tract the
THĀKCB is often an ennobled Kanet, or even, in Lahul, a Tibetan. In
Kángra the Ráthi is a debased Rájput or a promoted Ghirth. On the
other hand, the Kanet may be a degraded Kájput, as occurs in the Simla
Hills, where some Kanetsepts are unquestionably descended from cadet
branches of ruling families. The use of the terındebased' and
degraded' is however apt to be misleading because the gradual
merging of a younger brother's descendants into the ranks of the
commoners does not connote any loss of 'caste,' but only such lessening
of social rank as is found under similar circumstances in Europe.
A.- THE RAJPUTS OF THE JAMMU BORDER OR DUGGAR.
We have already seen how, along the Jammu border and beyond it
into Gurdaspur, the Rajputs are confined to the hills and the Játs to
* The pronunciation of the word in the Punjab is Rájput or Rájputt, and I have therefore
in this work been content to accent the first syllable only.
+ Macdonnell and Keith: Dedic Index, II, p. 218. Rájanya was the regular term for a
man of the royal family : it may also have been applied to all the nobles irrespective of
kipgly power. Later the term Kshatriya normally takes the place of Rajanya as a
designation for the ruling class : ibid, p. 216. Hence the chronological sequence was
Rajanya, Kebatriya, and Rájput. But, even in modern times the term Kshatriya retains a
shade of superiority over Rájput and in 1888 ? in the Hill States, the late Bir Denzil Ibbetson
found Rajputs of proximate royal descent entered in the Census schedules separataly as
Kshatriy, s, as teing above ordinary Rájputs, and he noted that Rájáputra not only denotes
Kshatriyus or son; of kings, but is also the name of a mixed casto, and of a tribe of fabulous
origin. The Tantra says: “Rájáputras spring from a Vaisya on an Ambashtha (physician).
A gain. thousands of others sprang from the foreheade of cows kept to supply oblations"
(Colebrooke's Essay, p. 272),
$Vol. II, p. 505, supra.
& See the article on Chitrali at p. 174 et seqq. of Vol. II.
Hodgson's Essay on the Military Tribes of Nepál. Some of the distinctive featuros of
the Punjab Khatri organisation appear to be reproduced in Nepal.



The Dogra Rajputs.
273
ib) Bhadwal. One family.
the plains,* but the line is not perhaps as rigid in other districts
along the Jammu border as it is in Gurdaspur. The Rájput tribes being
found in the plains interspersed among the Ját tribes which appear to
have gradually confined them to the hills and sub-montane tracts.
But between the Rájput system of the hills and the Ját system of the
plains, there is a very clear line of demarcation. The Ját tribes in the
plains are essentially democratic.t The Rájput tribes of the hills are :
classified on a loose and ever-shifting system into hypergamous grades.
Thus in Jammu itself the Rajput table of social precedence is thus
describedi :-
"By special precedence the Rájputs stand as follows:
1st Class ?--Original Rájputs (Solar race).
(a) Jamwal.
1 (6) Jasroția.
(c) Mankotia.
(Lunar race).
(a) Bandrál.
(g) Kishtwária.
(m) Mandi.
(n) Katoch.
(n) Kullu.
(c) Bilauri.
lii Goler.
(0) Kalerie.
(d) Hantál.
(1) Sabba.
(p) Guleria.
le) Bhotiál.
(%) Jaswál.
(b) Sarmorie.
(5) Bhadarwah.
(1) Suket.
The above two stand almost equal to each other in superiority.
2nd Class ?--Balf Rájputs, 2nd class (Solar race).
(a) Manhás.
(Lunar race).
(a) Ambarai. (6) Chib. (c) Jarál. 1 (d) Bhao.
3rd Class (Lunar race).
(a) Rakwál.
(c) Charak.
e) Langeh.
(9) Andotre
(0) Salaria (Salehria). 1 (d) Bághal.
(f) Bajiál. (h) Jaj.
4th Class (Lunar race).
(a) Mandál.
1 (d) Samsál.
(9) Kátal.
(3) Bajju.
(0) Rasiál.
(e) Jaggi.
(h) Bhulwal.
(k) Balwál.
(c) Kharakhatr. (f) Lalotre.
(i) Hans.
(2) Gori.
(m) Seroch.
These Rájputs are considered first class Thakkars now-a-days.
Rajputs of Solar and Lunar races intermarry ; while the Lunar race.
with the exception of their own caste, intermarry with other castes:
Rajputs of Solar and Lunar races receive their wives from half Rájputs
of both the races. But Jamwals do not take their wives from Manhás
because of their being descended from the same ancestor. Rokwals
give their daughters to Jamwal and Manhás only.
Machás, Ambarai, Chib, Bhao and Jarál intermarry and give their
daughters to first class Rájputs.
• Vol. II, p. 361.
| This statement is subject to several qualifications-see the art. on Játs in Vol. II. but
it is in the main correct.
+ By the late Khan Bahadur Munshi Ghulam Ahmad Khan in the Kashmir Cenesie
Rep., 1902, pp. 79-80. The value of the account is much impaired by the many typographi.
cal errors in it and I have only ventured to correct a few of them.
& It is usual to speak of the Salehria Rájputs as a tribe, but the term appears to merelt
mean "low.lander' and it is possible that the Salebria 'tribe' is really composed of 's
number of septs or fragments of tribes which happen to be settled in the salehr or
sub-montane tract: H. A. R.



274
The Manhás Rájputs.
Rokwal, Salehria, Clarak, Baghál, Langeb, Bojwal, Andotra and Jaj
intermarry and give their daughters to Rájputs of first and second
classes, and receive their wives from half Rajputs of class IV.
Half Rájputs of class IV who are considered as first class Thakkars,
intermarry between themselves, and receive their wives from other
Thakkars, but give their daughters to third class Rajputs only.
Thakkars of lower class, nut coming under the category of Rájputs,
now intermarry and give their daughters to Rájputs of fourth class, but
cannot take their wives from out of them because the customary widow-
marriage among these has degraded them.”
The Manhás* appear to have been a nomad tribe, averse to settled
abodes and the late Mr. J. T. Christie recorded the following account
of their separation from the parent stock :-Samman Doo, eldest son
and heir to the family estate quitted Jammu in dudgeon and founded
Gamrola, a village in the Chamal thána of Gurdaspur. Thence sprang
22 Manhás villages in that District, Sialkot and Jammu. Not one of
these contains a brick or stone building. On his father's death a de-
putation waited upon Samman Deo to beg him to return and assume his
rightful place, but he refused and, for some unknown reason, invoked
a curse upon those of his race who should live in masonry buildings.
Recent instances of the curse working are cited.t
It will be seen that in Jammu itself the Jamwal, who are naturally
placed first in the Rájput peerage as the clan of the ruling house, are
treated as quite distinct from the Manhás. Ibbetson's view was tbat :
" Japiwál was the old name of the whole tribe, but is now confined to
the royal branch who do not engage in agriculture, and look down
upon their cultivating brethren who are commonly styled Manhás.
The Manhás intermarry with the Salahria and other second class
Rájputs of the neighbourhood. They call their eldest son Rájá and the
younger ones Mián, and use the salutation Jui! In Sialkot 765 Manhas
have returned themselves also as Bhatti, 741 as Salahria, and 755 as
Raghbansi ; while in Gurdaspur 2,080 are also shown as Raghbansi.
So, of the Ját Manhás of Gujranwala, 1,325 are Virk who have shown
themselves as Manhás also. The Manbás are real husbandmen, and
therefore occupy a very inferior position.in the local scale of Rájput
precedence." These facts and figures go far to show that Manhás is
an old term for cultivator (possibly meaning middleman' or tacksman),
and that its original significance is still vaguely remembered.
In the Una tabsíl of Hoshiárpur the Manhas are said to have a
synonym Sagnai, derived from the village of that pame, Manbás being
derived from Marn Hans Deo. The ancestor of the tribe came from
Ajudhia, settled in Lahore, and then in Jammu, which Pars Rám,
another ancestor, re-peopled, and his brother, Autár Deo, founded the fort
of Báhu. Pars Rám's son, Karm Deo, had several sons, Marn Hans Deo
* An account of the Manhás tribe has already been given at p. 67 supra, but variants
might be added almost indefinitely. Thus in Gujrát their tradition is that Jodh Deo had
two sons, Mál Deo and Jakhar Deo. The latter's descendants took to cultivation, which
the Rajputs despise, and so were sarcastically dubbed Manhás. They date their settlements
io Gujrát to Humáyún's time, when Pargo came to Jammu and founded Pargowal where
their first tonsure is still performed. One of his 22 sons, Mahi, served under Akbar, turned
Muhammadan, and obtained a grant of land on the left bank of the Jhelum. Hence the
Muhammadan Manhás regard the Mabi sept, as well as the Salabria, Jaráh and Bhao, as
their offshoots, but too coropletely separated from them to allow of interinarriage.
+ P. N. Q., I, § 755.



The Rájputs in Gurdaspur.
275
being one. His descendants Dharm Deo and Karm Deo founded the
fort of Dharbgarh in Mangarwal, west of Sagnai. Rájá Abhi Chard
of Datarpur killed Karm Deo in battle whereupon Dharm Deo aban-
doned Dharbgarh and founded Sagnai 17 generations ago. The ruins
of Dharbgarh still exist. The Malkotiá, Siumaniál, and Lakhan Pur
appear to date from the same period. Some years ago, the Manhás
assembled at Sagnai and decided that they were entitled to the salata-
tion jai-dia, but this form is not conceded to them by the Rajputs of
the first grade. T'he tribe claims to have erected the temple of Tirkatá
Devi and the fort of Sabánu at Jasrotá in Jammu, and also the fort of
Dhúpgarh since demolished. The Manhás cannot obtain wives from
the Rajputs of the first grade nor will they give daughters to the
fourth or fifth grades except the Dhongotar, a tribe of the fourth
grade, but daughters are taken from fourth grade tribes and even
from the fifth grade, but only in case a wife is not obtainable from the
second or third grade : for example a headman of Sagnai has married a
girl of the Dhantiál, a fourth grade tribe. At marriage feasts or other
occasions the order of precedence is according to age and if there be
men of a higher grade present they sit above those of lower grades.
There are said to be eight tribes of the second grade. After the
Maphás come the Dúd, Jariál, and Sonkhlá. The Manhás and Sonkhla
came from the West and claim to be superior to the Jajkária Rájputs
in Kángra. But their status varies with their locality. Thus the
Manhás are regarded as the highest class in Hamirpur and the Sonkhla
as the highest class in Dera tahsil.
On the eastern part of the Japjinu border lies Gurdaspur in which
District the Rájput system was thus described by Sir Louis Dane* :-
“The hilly tract of Gurdaspur is peopled almost entirely by Thakkars
or spurious Rájputs, the sub-montane is mainly Rájputs, and plains
population is principally Ját. There are very few true Jaikaria Rájputs,
as the Pathánias and Manhas, who might lay claim to this rank, have
lost grade by turning personally to direct agriculture. Practically, all
of these tribes come under the generic term of Salámias, and many of
them hardly deserve the name of Rajputs at all, and would be called
Ráthis in Kángra, who are repudiated by the true-blood Rájputs. The
lowest clans of all are known as Rám-Rámias. Leaving the classification
based on the method of salutation adopted, and arranging the Rájputs
by the traditional races of Surajbansi. and Som-bansi, we have the
following results :-
Chandar-bansi.
suraj-bansi.
Jamuál.
Thakiál.
Guleria.
Ghandar.
Jasnotia (? Jasrotia). Bhadiár.
Pathania.
Makbotra.
Janglotia.
Salehria.*
Samria.
Rakwál.
Manhás.
Gahotra.
Khokhar.
Chauhan.
Harchand.
Malotra.*
Kohal.
Madar.
Jarrál.
Manj.*
Bhatti.
Kanauch.
Sin.
Manjriál.
Bhamrotra.
Awan.
Indauria.
Riál.
Lamin.
Samanch.
Chith.
Jhaggi.*
Kakotra.
Jhanjua.
Bágal.
Sanauria.
Náru.
Dhanidial.
Tangrál.
Mahotra
Ladít.
Balím.
Saroch.
Kátil.
Thakkar.
Lalotra.
* Gurdáspur Gazetteer, 1891-2, pp. 68-70.
1



276
The Rájputs in Gurdáspur.
Those shown in italics call themselves Jaikarias, but except the first
two Chandar-bansi, and the first three, Suraj-bansi the other clans have
really lost their claim to the salutation of Jaideya in this District. The
clans against whose names an asterisk has been placed are all locally
known as kahri,* or those who only take from or give wives to a parti-
cular clan, and the others or dohri, or those who take and give wives
in the same clan. The former class are considered superior. The five
true Jaikaria classes give and take in marriage amongst themselves,
and take from the order Jaikaria and kahri clans. The dohri clans
intermarry, except with their own clan or that of their mothers and
paternal or maternal grandfather. Amongst the inferior Jaikaria
and kahri clans there is a regular order of precedence, and they take
from a lower and give to a higher clan. Thus the Tangráls take from
the Kátils, Lalotras and Koháls, and give to the Jarráls, Salehrias
and Indaurias, the Koháls take from the Kátils and hill Thak.
kars, and give to the Tangráls, and the Salehrias give to the Manhás
and take from the Gahotras, Kátils and Lalotras, A tendency is,
however, observable amongst them to level away these distinctions to
some extent, and if this extends it will be an excellent thing. The
Thakkars in the hill occupy the very lowest rung of the ladder, and so
have not been shown in the list. They have innumerable subdivisions
amongst themselves, and practice widow remarriage. The custom of
karewa is also not uncommon amongst most of the dohri clans. This
classification into gots or clans is not only interesting as an historical
and ethnological study, but is also of considerable importance from the
baser points of view of the revenue assessing officer and vital statisti-
cian. A curious feature of the race is that the lower classes appear to
be dying out. Their estates are undermanded, so far as the proprietors
go, and badly farmed ; all sorts of reasons based on poverty of soil,
climate, and general impoverishment are adduced by the people
themselves to explain this, but, in my opinion, none of these are suffi-
* The term kuhri appears to be derived from ek 'one,' and dohri from do, 'two.' Appa-
rontly the latter class make reciprocal betrothals, while the latter only arrange unilateral
ones. This conjecture is confirmed by the Kashmir Census Rep. of 1912, which says:
" Among the Rájputs, even as between the sub-castes of undisputed nobility of birth, there
are minute distinctions as to which can give and which can take girls in marriage and
these limitations are adhered to with great pride. It is this practice that has led to the
distinction that exists between the ekehra and dohra clans. The foriner i.e. the ekehra,
clearly) sections of a caste or sub-caste are those which can contract only a one-sided match,
that is to say they can accept only the daughters of the other party for marriage with their
sons, but, because of their superiority in the social scale, cannot give their own daughters in
marriage to the sons of that party. The dohra classes exchange sons and daughters without
any restriction. In fact marriages amongst them are settled only on a system of exchange.
A, for instance, marries his son to B's daughter only if he has a daughter to give to B's son.
One of the evil consequences of this is that the ekehras have to pay cash by way of compen.
sation to dohras when taking girls from the latter for marriage to their sons. This has lod
to making marriage a merely mercenary affair. On the other hand the ekehra classes may
sometimes have to pay for boys from higher families (though this custom is denied by the
higher classes, That is, too, why such mea of these classes as cannot afford to pay tho
bride-prico remain unmarried."
The hypergamous grading appears to be :-
i. Jai-Kária La
ii. Kahri avoiding Willow remarriage.
iii. Dohri, who exchanges brides apparently and certainly practise widow remarriage.
iv. Thakkar, corresponding to the Ráthis of Kángra, but probably including ii and üi.
The Jai.Kiria further have two grades, hypergamous inter se, one the true or acknow.
ledged Jaj. Kária, the other with a doubtful right to that title.



Rájputs of the Eastern Hills.
277
cient to entirely account for the results noticed. The first two affect
all tribes alike, and yet amongst the higher classes there is a general
tendency to increase, while, where the Rajputs have embraced Islám,
they are just as numerous as any other race. The last result probably
lends the required clue. The marriage law amongst the Hindu Rajput
ordinarily requires that a higher clan should not give its daughters in
marriage to a lower, though they may take from the lower class. The
lower, therefore, they descend the tribal ladder the more difficult it is
for a man to obtain a suitable wife: and the climax is reached in the
case of the Thakkars, who are here at the bottom of the scale, and
amongst whom the deterioration of race and generally dwindling ten-
dency are most marked. The daughters leave the clan, and the men
must either remain unmarried or take their brides from sub-tribes
which, though not regarded consanguinous, have so frequently in.
termarried during past centuries as to ruin the physical prospects of
the progeny. On embracing Islám the strict rules of the marriage
law are much released, and though outside marriages are preferred,
there is nothing to prevent general marriages even within the clan. As
a consequence we find that, while the Muhammadan Manhás, Kátil and
Salebria Rajputs have so multiplied, as to have reduced their aver-
age holding 7 acres in Shakargarh, the Hindu have dwindled until each
proprietor owns as much as 13 acres, and in the case of the lower claps
the contrast is much more striking."
Going still farthur east we have the Rájput system of the Punjab
Himalayas which is imperfectly described below.
B.—THE HINDU RAJPUTS OF THE EASTERN HILLS.
In the eastern hills, which lie in the north-east corner of the Punjab,
we have a type, and undoubtedly a very ancient type, of Hinda society
which has been practically untouched by Muhammadan influences,
though possibly Buddhism may at one time have affected its develop-
ment. This society has an exceedingly complicated organization,
based on the two principles of natural descent and social status inde-
pendent of that descent, which we have found to exist, in a compara-
tively simple form, among the Khatris. Caste, in the accepted meaning
of that term, may be said not to exist. The bighest stratum of society
is composed of a number of tribes which are split up into several groups
of different social status, and which are generically called Rajputs. Below
these Rájput tribes are the cultivating classes, the Kanets and Ghiraths,
and below them again the artizans and menials.
The Rájputs consist of numerous tribes, divided into still more nu.
merous septs or als, both tribes and septs being based on natural descent.
The al does not appear to be necessarily exogamous, for in some cases
the term is used as practically equivalent co family, and what the
exogamous unit really is I am unable to say.*
* "It is worthy of notice that there is some vagueness of idea, and probably indefinite,
ness of custom, aboat tha prohibited degrees” among the Játs and Brahmans of the south
east Punjab (Code of Tribal Custom. Gurgaon, p. 20),



.
278
STATUS-GROUPS.
Tribe or Race.
III.—Thákur.
IV.- Ráthi,
1.-Mián or Jaikária.
II.-- Rájput.
Ist grade Ránas.
2nd grade Rápas.
|
1st grade.
2nd grade.
Katoch* :-
; Kashab-gotra.
Katoch sopts :-
Bhim-Chandia.
Diláwar-Chandia.
Dalpatia.
Khem. Chandia
Katoch septs :
Babhauria.
Indauria.
Katoch sept:-
Gararwal.
Goleria sept:-
Gahlotia.
Goleria septs :-
Sanwaria.
Malothar.
: Changra.
Goleria clans :-
Septs:-
Gadotia.
Chand.
Batlohar.
„Bangolar.
Murádpuria.
Saroch.
Kadol.
Hatnoch.
Kishen-Singhia.
Gagli.
Hatrial.
Hamirpuria.
Badn-Chandia
Jaswal clan.
Rajput gradations
Jaswal sept :-
Jasial.
Jaswál septs :-
Dongarwal.
Malial.
Sudisl.
Balohi.
Kadehria.
Dadhwal clan.
Sibala clan.
Dadhwal sept:
Bujherwal.
Chibh.
Dadhwal sept:
Sobaru.



Chandr-bansi :-
Rathor.
Chambial clan.
| Chambiál sept:-
Bajrotha.
Chambiál septs :-
Bakaria,
Tain.
Chambolia.
Sonkhla.
Jamwal clan.
Chandr-bansi :-
Kondal-gotra.
Kachhwaba:-
Bhardwaj-gotra.
Sonkhla sept :-
Rachar.
Jamwal septs :-
Gobena.
Gharwal.
Kanál.
Rawal.
Bhalabhar,
Jamwál septs :-
Bhalwal.
Bbelwál.
Baliśl.
Rakwál.
Taliarag.
Tatwan.
Saruhi.
Jamwal septs :
Nagrain.
Bhandrai,
Septs :-
Mankotia.
Jasrotia.
Sampal.
Pathánia septe :-
Jhaggi.
Khantwal.
Gangeta.
Joseta. :
Dhamiál,
Dolaria. :
Rapothria
Magrolaria.
Oghisl.
Pathápia septs :
Baraswál.
Jaleria.
Anotra.
Jangliáli.
Dingrál.
Ladhiarach.
Gbanoria (Dod).
Jariál.
Pathánia clan.
Septs :-
Okhiál.
Thadiál.
Suliálch.
Talaria.
Goiralia.
Tukrolia.
Holar.
Tharia.
Manpuria.
Luria.
Anotar.
Bhalakhria.
Banolar,
Ratiál.
Kokhria.
Gorezal.
Dagla.
Dhamriál.
Chanjol.
Gangwatia.
Hariál.
(All names of places.)
in the Eastern Fills.
.
..
* The original form was Katochan, possibly 'an inhabitant of the Katoch country,' as Forster and Moorcroft called the Kángļa State. They
stylo the ruling family Katochin. But Trigadh was in use as the name of the Kángra State as late as the beginning of the XIX cenfury, and there is no
other direct ovidence that it was ever called Katoch.
279



-
-
280
STATUS-GROUPS.
Tribe or Race.
III.-Thákur.
IV.-Ráthi,
1.-Mián or Jaikäria.
II.-Rájput.
1st grade Ránas. / 2nd grade Ránas.
1st grade.
2nd grade.
Tanwar :-
Itri-gotra.
Pundrit:-
Itri-gotra.
Septs:-
Baloria.
Bhadwal
Oghiál,
Dhumriál.
Chabaria.
Dheria.
Pundrit:-
Itri-gotra.
The Kola (Kulu).
Mandisl, Buketar.
Patriál sub-clan:-
Septs:
Manaswalia.
Dad.
Banloch.
Halkaia.
Rajput gradations
Chandel:-
Itri-gotra.
Kablaria.
Kahluria septs :-
Chandla.
Chandpuria.
Jada-bansi :-
Kondal.gotra.
Kotleh ria.
Kotlebri& sept :-
Ranot.
Manhás.
Manhás septs:
Jamuwal.
Samiál,
oto.
etc.
oto.
etc.
.



in the Eastern Hills.
281
ome cotin a rest led to
The tribes are split up into six status-groups in the manner shown
in the table on pages 278-280, so that the order of social precedence
stands thus:-
IS Ist grade Ránas.
I. - Mián. II.-Rájput. III.-Thákur
W 2nd » »
1st grade Ránas.
IV.-Ráthi ..
• Land »
These terms require some comment. It will be observed that the
term Rájput appears to be used in a restricted as well as in a general
sense, and as this twc-fold meaning has led to confusion I propose to
call these groups, collectively, the Rájput-Ráthi groups. It will further
be seen that each of the terms used denotes status, not race, or caste,
or tribe. Barnes*, for instance, says :- Two of the old royal and now
essentially Rájput families (of Kángra) are said to be Brahman by origi-
nal stock.' Mián literally means 'prince,' and as the members of that
grade are entitled to the salutation jai dia they are also called Jaikára,
but this group is also called, vaguely, Rájput. Of the other terms Thá-
kur, or baron, and Ráná or chief, are simply titles denoting status or rank,
while it is suggested that Ráthi is derived from rakhebi (which is an equi-
valent of karewa, or widow remarriage). However this may be, Ráthi
is a term which implies loss of status and so is rarely used by the Ráthis
themselves. Thus all the terms in use denote status and nothing else.
Lastly, it will be seen that the tribes are not graded according to
status, for we find that even some Katoch septs are quite low down in
the scale, though for the most part the Kațoch are Mián of Jaikária
status. Status depends mainly on the strictness with which certain
social rules are observed. Thus 'the Mián and the Thákur must not
permit widow remarriage.' Further a Mián should not plough, give
his daughter in an inferior class, nor take a wife from it.t He may
not accept any price for a daughter, and his women-folk must observe
strict parda. The chief distiuctions between a Mián and a Thákur
seem to be that the latter may plough and also may take a wife from a
Ráthi. The Jaikária are not supposed to eat kachchi, or smoke except
with one another, but in practice it is regarded as a venial offence if
they do so with the grade next below them. The Ráthi practises
karewa, and that distinguishes him from the Rájput. They also accept
a bride-price, but are in this respect only on a level with the Thákurs,
who often do the same, or effect exchange betrothals.I
But in former times, if not now, status could also be gained by royal
favour, for a Rája might promote a Ghirth to be a Ráthi, or a Thákur to
be a Rájput, for service done or money given. By giving a daughter
to an impoverished rája a rich Ráthi may raise his clan--not merely,
it would seem himself or his family—to Thákur Rájput status. If a
rája takes a Pátial girl, whom he has seen herding cattle and fallen in
love with, the girls whole clan begins to give its daughters to Miáns
and gains a step in the social scale. On the other hand, by practising
widow remarriage or giving a daughter to an inferior grade, status
could be diminished or lost.
* Kangra Settlement Report, $ 73.
† But he may take a wife from an inferior status.group. Thủ term 'class' here seems
to bo used loosely for caste,
* Lyall's Kángra Settlement Rep., $72. 1 $ Ibid. $$ 73 and 66.



282
Rájput and lower grades.
The effects of this system are seen in the varying status of the septs
in each tribe, but the complexity of the system is not fully brought out
in the table, for there are degrees of social status, even within the sept
based co proximity to its original home, Further we find that in each
status-group some ais or septs are hypergamous, while others are not,
for they refuse to yive daughters to the next highest group. Lastly,
the status of a tribe may vary with the locality in which it is settled.
In fine, Rájput society is in a state of chaos and it is hardly possible
to give any clear account in detail of its various ramifications. Moreover,
any such account would probably be obsolete in a few years, for society
is in a state of flux, but the fluctuating units are the septs or als, or at
least the families, not the individual members of the tribe.
The relations of the Rájput-Ráthi groups to the lower castes.-As we
have seen the Ráthis give daughters to the Thákurs and they in turn to
the Mián, a system which apparently finds expression in the saying:-
Chauthi pirhi Ráthni ki ráni banjae or in the fourth generation
the Ráthi's daughter becomes a queen. This is to be explained as mean-
ing that a Ráthi's daughter, the first generation, may marry a Thákur
in the second generation. In the third her daughter may marry a
Rájput and her daughter again may marry a Mían or a ruling chief. At
least this is thy only way ia wbich the expression “fourth generation"
seems explicable. There is a similar saying regarding a Kanetni, or the
daughter of a Kanet, who may in the fifth generation become a queen.
Lastly, there is the saying :- Satvin pirhi Ğhirthni ki dhi rání hojái
or in the seventh goneration a Ghirth's daughter becomes a queen.'*
But even this does not close the circle of marriage relationships.
The Ráthi may contract a jhanjrara or second marriage with a woman
of another caste, such as Ját or Jhíwar, and the issue by such a
marriage are deemed legitimate. Thus we arrive at once at the obvious
conclusion that there is no endogamous Rajput 'caste' at all, and
moreover there are no sub-castes, but a series of status-groups each
more or less hypergamous. :
Results of the Rajput social system. The Rájputs of the hills exhibit
some of the usual features of a society organized on a system of hyper-
gamy. Rájputs of high family are heavily bribed to marry owing to
the feeling of pride which forbids a Rajput to marry a daughter to
any but a man of equal or rather superior family but his own. Here
we have Kulinism in full force. The Rájputs of the third grade or
Thákurs are thus placed in a peculiarly unfortunate position. On the
one hand, they have to buy husbands for their daughters. On the
other hand, the Ráthis will not give them daughters without exacting
a price so that they are mulcted both when marrying and wben
giving in marriage.
Rája Jai Chand, Raja of Lambagraon, thus classified the Rájputs of
Kangra, but it is doubtful whether all bis septs (als) are in fact exogam-
ous, and there is some uncertainty also as to the exact nature of the
groups bere called clans.
*, Pandit Hari Kishen Kaul gives the steps thus : (1) a Ghirath girl may marry a
Kachcha Ráthi, and (2) her daughter a Pakka Ráthi. Their daughter in tarn may marry
(3) a Thakkar, and (4) a Ibakkar may give his daughter to & Rájpat, he (5) to a Mián
and (6) a Mián's daughter may be married to a Rája, and so become a ráni.



The Rájputs in the Simla Hills.
283
The chief clans of Rajputs found in the Simla hills are shown below
together with the place whence they are said to have come.
Pramár or Panwari Ujjain,
Mabháli
Chauhan
Lohákri
Solanghi.
Rangliáni ... Márwár, etc., diforent
Prahár.
Trondi
... districts.
Gaur
Bengal.
Gutáni
Gyáru
Gaya.
Nirál
Katal
Náhan Sirmúr. Thákur
Vishal
Kanchananagar
Márwar.
Rüná
(Deccan). Pathánia
Delhi.
Padwal
... Málwa.
Kshatriya ... Descended from Pars
Rám.
Many of these clans are said to have come when the Rájputs were
massacred by Balrámji ; the Gaur is said to have come in 1267 Bikr-
majit, and the Pathánia about three centuries ago, but no precise date
can be assigned to tbe Rájput invasions, and they appear to have come
in small numbers winning their way to sovereignty over the country
rather by their superior civilization than by conquest on a large scale.
All the chiefs of the hill States are Rájputs and their ancestors are
mentioned in the Bhagvat and the Mahabhárat. The Ráwats and
Ráthis may be classed also as Rájputs. They however plough and
cultivate land with their own hands, and their rites at a wedding or a
death are not according to the Shástras. Sartoras are those born of
a Rajput father and a Kanet or some other low caste mother. Rájputs
do not intermarry with them nor eat food prepared by them.
The writer of the above paragraph then goes on to say that the first
four sections of the Dasháls-Gonds, Theogs, Madháns, Darkotis, etc.
were for a long time after their migration to the hills, considered to be
low caste like the Kanets, and did not wear the sacred thread nor
perform the orthodox death ceremonies. Gradually, however, they
mixed with the Rajputs, and began to give their daughters in marriage
to wealthy Rájputs. Afterwards the Rájput also condescended to
marry their daughters to them. The history of the migration of the
Jár Giarús and Jár Katals is very much the same. In reality they were
Brahmans, and Brahmaps of their brotherhood are still to be found.
But they gave up their Brahmanical functions and, adopting the
marriage and death ceremonies of Rajputs, mixed with them. For
example the states of Kot Khai, Kumhársain, Karangla, Delath,
Kanethi, Jubbal, Ráwin, Sairi, Taroch and Khash were full of low
castes of Kanets, but now they have adopted the ceremonies of the
superior Kanets. The Sársut and Gaur Brahmans did not intermarry
but now they do so.
The writer, it will be observed, does not tell us who the Dasháls are, but
he apparently means that they were immigrants from the plains who
founded the baronies of Gond, Theog, Madhán and Darkoti, with others
not specified. These baronies are now ruled by Ránás owning & more
or less nominal allegiance to their suzerain states. The Giaru (from
Gaya) and the Katál both appear to be called Jár, but the important
thing about them is that both are of Brahman origin, but adopted
Rájput avocations and usages, and so became amalgamated with the
older Rajputs, just as the Kanets of Kot Khai and the other States
specified got mixed up and the Gaur and Sársut Brahmans intermingled.
20 Gaurando bai and threated with the



284
The Rájputs of the Jaswán Dún.
The writer is quoted verbatim because what he writes is not only
interesting in itself, but his way of writing illustrates the mental pro-
cesses by which Brahmans come to be accepted as Rájputs by caste,
and so on.
Descending from the Kángra Valley and crossing the range which
running parallel with the Siwáliks forms the Jaswán Dún or valley
and is included in the Una tahsil of Hoshiarpar, we find the following
elaborate classification of the Rajputs put forward :-
1. First grade containing 13 classes.
2. Second ,
3. Third
Fourth,
5. Fifth
109
40
-
1.-RAJPUTS OF THE FIRST GRADE.
1. Katoch,
3. Jaswal,
2. Goleria,
4. Sibia,
5. Dadhwal,
but the last four are mere offshoots of the first. To these are added
Kahlúria, Kotlehria, Hindúria, Sirmúria, Mankotia, Mandial and
Dhadwál.* Sipáhia is a modern form of 4.
The original settlement of the Jaswál was at Bhir Jaswan in Thána
Amb, and remains of buildings, wells and fountains still exist on a
hill at that place. They acquired the name of Jasiál or Jaswál from
the Jaswán Dún in Hoshiarpur.
The Sibaia were settled at Síba or Sivia in tahsil Dera, but they
may have derived their name from Rájá Sapúran Chand who founded
Síba, or indeed Síba may have been named from him. Sapúran Chaod
became a rájá four generations after Rájá Hari Chand who founded
Haripur.
The Dadhwal appear to have been undoubtedly first settled at Dadh,
but possibly they derive their name from the Dadwa Latta tract wbich
comprises parts of Hajipur, Datárpur, and certain villages in Amb,
Garbdiwala and Hariána: or perhaps the tract takes its name from
the tribe.
Although the Goleria, Sibáia, Dadhwal and Jaswal were originally
only branches of the Katoch they intermarry amongst themselves but.
not with the Katoch. This is the more remarkable because Goleria is
an older branch than the Katoch and still performs the ráj-tilak. The
four septs mentioned may however take wives from the second and
third grades except that the Saswal may not intermarry with the
Jasiál of the second grade. Certain villages held by these septs
appear to be regarded as of lower status, for example the Jaswal of
Phadaale Wasoh are of the first grade, those of Pandogah of the
* All these are clearly territorial designations. Thus :
Kahlúria --of Kahlór or Biláspur; Kotlehria-of Kotlebr, tbe ruling family of that stato;
Hindúria--of Hindúr or Nálágarh ; Sirmúria-of Sirmúr or Nában; Mankotia - of
Maakot aad Mandiál of Mandi ; Dadhwal-of Dadh (and so on),



The Rájputs of the Jaswán Dún.
285
second and those of Amb, Una, Kalwa-badoh and Kothra, or of Devia,
Phore, Amalhar, Pholar and Amb-Tallu are even below (junior to)
the second grade and so on.
The Katoch,* etc., bave a similar classification and these gradations
are scrupulously observed on all occasions.
II.-THE RAJPUTS OF THE SECOND GRADE.
Manhás.
Dud.
Jasrotia.
Jariál.
Sonkhla.
The origin of the Dud is ascribed to Garhmuktear, whence they went
to Bindraban, thence to Garhi Mánaswál in tabsil Gashshankar and
thence to Kungrat and Batin in Una tahsil. Finally they settled in
Salvi, etc., in Thána Amb.
The Jariál (or Tamúr, a synonym of unknown origin), are also
called Rájauri from Rájaur, a province of Jammu. Their ancestor
Nibal Singh was defeated and killed by one of the Mughals. His
daughters committed suicide, but one of his ránis escaped to Kálánaur
accompanied by her parohit and gave birth to a son named Júrá, whence
the name of the tribe. She took refuge in Chamba with a mercbant
who acquired great wealth owing to the boy's good fortune, in conse-
quence of which he changed his name to Bhág Singh and his descen-
ttled in Nangal Jariálán and other villages of Amb.
onkbla, or Sankhudhá ra, the name of their original home, are
d from Rájás Bhoj and Vikramaditya. Their ancestor Rájá
Jagdes came to the hills to worship at Jawala Mukhi. He was
accompanied by various retainers, including his parohit. Having
married into the Kațoch family he settled at Jalári near Nádaun.
A faqir gave one of their ancestors, by name Sangu, the bar or power
to cure small-pox and, this gift was inherited by Sangu's descendants,
one of whom practised inoculation of the right hand, using a certain
herb. In order to practise this inoculation the tribe settled in various
villages, especially in Nagholi in tahsil Una. They are also spread
over the Simla hills and Kángra. Sati worship is common amongst
these tribes. Amongst the Jariál five women of the bride's brother.
hood must take part in the gotkunála, which is not the case with the
Manhás or tribes of the first grade. It is also said that the whole of
the brotherhood and lágis should attend a wedding. Amongst the
Sonkhla on the samohat day, before a wedding, a feast is given to the
brotherhood of the bridegroom, that is to say this feast is regarded
as a part of the samohat; other tribes fcast the members of the
marriage procession at the bridegroom's house.
The Jariál regard Shiv-ji as their Isht or patron deity. The Jariál
and Sonkhla appear to perform no sacrifices. The Dúd consult a
Brahman and feed him before sowing.
* For example the Hemat-or Hem-Chandia Katoch of Bijapur in Kángra will not smoko
with tho Katoch of certain other villages simply because the former live close to Lamba-
gr son, the original residence of the family.



286
The Rájputs of the Jaswan Dún.
The remaining four tribes are Ladda, Ghorebaha, Chandla, and
Bhanot.
III.-RAJPUTS OF THE THIRD GRADE.
This grade comprises eight tribes :*
Name.
Synonym.
Name.
Synonym.
Jasikl.
Baris It
... Ohaudhri.
Pátiál
Pathinia.
P&tial
... Raghu-bans.
Phadiártakhi ... Taschak.
Bhamnauria ... Náru,
Sandal
Chaudhri.
Chanwaria.
The Jasiál say they came from the South and conquered the Jaswan
valley, but were all exterminated by an invader Purab Chand (who had
married their king's daughter), except one boy who escaped. Rájá
Purab Chand was afilicted with a disease on account of his cruelty to the
Jasiál, until he sought out the boy and made him enter the Kásbab
got, hitherto the got only of the Katoch. .
Sandal's ancestor Jadhbir abandoning Chhalkákra took refuge from
Muhammadan oppression with his mother's father in Arniála-Sháhpur
in tahsil Hoshiarpur and was given 5 villages for maintenance, includ.
ing Arniála-Sháhpur, which the tribe still holds.
IV.-TRIBES OF THE FOURTH GRADE.
Name.
Synonym.
Name.
Synonym.
Bajan
Khokhar.
Sihanda.
Dhantiál
Rána.
Badhmánia ... Punwar.
Ladol
Jamwal.
Salobar.
Bangwai
Kaloth.
Ranáwat.
Leori
... Panwar.
Dangober ... Jaswal.
Malputh.
1. Many years ago the ancestor of the Rájan came to Rájni Devi in
Hoshiarpur and settled there-whence the name Rájan. Khokhar
is said to be their original name.
The Rájan of Rájni went on a wedding procession to Hindur but were
attacked by the Rájputs and all save one woman exterminated. She
bad a son whose three sons Ada, Santu and Bagga founded the villages
of those names in Amb in their mother's country.
2. Dhantial derives its name from . M. Dhontha in tahsil Dera.
Ráná was a title bestowed by a Rájá on an ancestor.
3. The Ladol or Jamwal came originally from Oudh to Jammu
where they settled at Ladwára.
. The names of some of these trihes also are territorial, thus:-
Paadiártakhi from Phandura. | Bhamnauria from Bhamnur in Dasuya tahsil.
Patial from Patna,
Chanwaria from Ghawásan Chanwar in Dora
1 tahsil.
† There is also a Baris II which claims to be superior to Bariá I, while Sandal and Baril I
aro also said to be synonyms.
Baris II has 6 als:
Dhuriál from Dharu village.
Surial from Suri village.
Nahrial from Vabri
Satotalia from Tila Satotalgarb in Kothra.
Marill from Mairi
Badawat from Arnisla.



287
The Rájputs of the Jaswán Dún.
The Ladol tradition is that they are descended thus :-
Rám Chandr.
oder Kashester
Rugrimage descendjadhania Autar Dan
Litu
Kashu
(founded
(founded Kasháwar,
Lahore).
or Kasur).
Their descendants were Autár Deo and Paras Rám and the latter
established six rájadhánis or kingdoms and 16 mandis or fiefs. Jam-
past Deo's descendants still live in Jammu, but Kala Deo left it on a
pilgrimage and settled at Ladoli, their present village, with Tháthal,
Katohar and Athmánia.
4. The Bangwái derive their name from Bangoi in Goler. .
The Rach Brahman are the parohits of the Bangwái, because, as
usual, one of that Brahman section harboured the two wives of their
ancestor, who had heen poisoned. Their sods settled, one in Bhul in
Hájipur, the other in Bangoi. The latter's descendants emigrated to
Abhipur, Fatehpur, and thence to Goyandpur Nabhra, still holding the
last two villages.
5. Láori is from Láwar, the locality of which is given as iu Hindu-
stán.
The Láore migrated from Lawar to Babhar, in Una, and thence to
Komerán, a settlement of the Kulsu Rájputs (who seem to be extinct).
6. Malputh is derived from Multán!
7. Sihanda—from Sindh.
8. Badhmania-from a place Badhmana.
9. Salohar-from Salwa.
10. Ranáwat-not explained.
11. Dangohar-a branch of the Jaswál settled in Dangoh, but this
claim is not admitted by the Katoch.
The exact places of 10 and 11 are doubtful.
V.-TRIBES OF THE FIFTA GRADE.
Eleven tribes of this grade are found in Tabsil Una :-
1. Bringwál (synonym Chandla) is said to derive its name from
Pingal or Bengal in Dasuya (?). Their ancestor Hardiál Chand came
from Hindustán to Kablúr, whence his descendants .omigrated to
Ghawasan in Dera and thence to Bengli, in Upa, near Amb and Lobára.
2. Masotha, or Thakkar, descended from Meda, came from Mastiáni
io Kangra (whence the name) and thence to Nakroh in Una. Thakkar
appears to denote their rank.
3. Bajotha derives its name from Raja Bhoj. It came from Katra
Thanapuri in Hindustan and thence as a ruling tribe to Delhi and
Bhatinda. After that it established itself in Sirmúr and then in Katra,
in Dera, Ghamror, Mandholi, Nári and Tohlo.
4 Pathwal (Punwar) is derived from bhathi, a 'still,' because their
progenitor was superintendent of a distillery.
Bije Sen is said to be the ancestor of the Pathwál, Badhmánia, Gori
and Sonkhla.



288
The Rájputs of the Eastern plains.
5. Gurtaye (Sándal or Muqaddam) derives its name from Gaggar
garh, or Goret according to another tradition, where they once lived.
They emigrated from Sirmúr.
6. Chángri, from Changar in Kángra, near Jawalamukhi. Thence
they came to Natháhi.
7. Dohal (Chaubán), from the village of that name near Amb. They
also hold Karotia and Dhanotia, and hence the Karotia and Dhontiál
are regarded as sub-divisions of this tribe.
8. Gangáet-from Ganga (Ganges). They first settled in Bít
Mánaswal and now occupy Amb and Mawa.
9. Jábrá or Chambiál—from Jabar in Kángra. Migrating from
Chamba, they founded a state at Haripur but were exterminated with
the exception of a woman who escaped. Her descendants settled in
Jabar and Ghúwai, and at Nakroh.
10. Ragwáli, from Rugwálgarh in Kángra where their ancestor
Ratn Pál settled after migrating from Delhi via Jammu. They have 4
branches :-
(1). Raghwáli, descended from Sucheta, his eldest son, living in
Chalar.
(2). Baniáli from Bania, living in Baliána in Kángra.
(3). Tiáliya, from Tijai (also living in Kangſa), besides Baghwáli.
C.-THE RAJPUTS OF THE EASTERN PLAINS.
Next come the Rájputs of the Delhi territory and the Jumna yalley *
They belong for the most part to the two great tribes of Chauhán and
Punwar which gave Delhi its most famous dynasties, but several other
tribes have to be added to these two and their origins are ascribed to
three different races. Like the Hill Rájputs these tribes all claim to be
ultimately descended from the few great tribes or royal races or kuls.
as they are commonly called, of the Rájput annals, and each of these
races is divided again into innumerable local clans called sachi or
gots. Thus according to the account given in the Phulkián States
Gazetteer :-
“ The Rájputs are divided into three races (bans) Súraj-bansi (solar) +
Chandar-kansi (lunar) and Agni-kul or Baragh-bapsi. Each bans is
again divided into khánps, each khânp into nakhs and each nakh, it is
said, into gôts. The Agni-kul have four branches (? khánps), () the
Solankhi, or '16-handed'; (ii) the Sánkbla, blowing sankh or shell ;
Gin the Pramara or Punwár (whose ancestor had no arms), and (iv) the
Chauhan, the 'four-handed', also called the Chatr-bhuj. .The eponym
of the latter had two sons :-Sikand whose descendants are found in
* According to Cunningham the term Rájputána extended previous to the Mahratta
conquest from the Sutlej on the west to the Chhota Sindh river of Márwár on the east. The
term Rajwára (?)
† The following is a curious scrap of Mirási genealogy from Lahore :-
Raja, Ghang, Surajbansi.
China
Chauhan
Duggle
Nangra
- four septs which do not intermarry, except when Muhammadans.
The Goria Mirásis say that Ghang had 12 sons--one of whom was Goria. Some of tho
Goria are Telis, others horse-breakers. The Chima would appear to be the Chíma Játs and
the Nangra the Nagra Jáps, but who the Duggle are it is impossible to say.



The Rájputs of the Eastern plains.
289
Bawal, and Bhál whose descendants inhabit the BágarSikand bad 12
sons, each of whom founded a separate nakh, thus: (1) Alan Deojí,
eponym of the Chaubán Rájputs in Bawal, founded the Alanot nalch,
(2) Hardaljí founded the Háda nakh, (3) Deoji founded the Dewara
nakh, (4) Suraj Mal founded the Adsongra nukh, (5) Balaji founded the
Balia nakh. Tha (6) Khenchi,* (7) Narman, (8) Bhag, (9) Bargala,
(10) Dasotra, (11) Basotra and (12) Kahi! nakhs are named after his
other sons. The Chauháos form an exogamous group. Those of Báwal
nizámat are Alanot by nakh and Bach by got, Bachash having been
their ancestor. Like Sikana's descendants they worship Asawári Devi,
whose temple is at Samber in Jaipur Bhal's descendants worship Jibbi
Devi of Khandela. The descendants of Sikand worship the Bhirgwat
Godáwari stream, wear a three stringed janeo, and specially follow the
sham Veda. Every khánp of these Rájputs has a tree as its dhári, i.e. its
members do not cut or use it. Thus the Rájputs of Bawal nizámat do not
cut the asa pála tree. Prior to the period of Rajput supremacy Bawal,
including the modern tahsils of Rewari and Kot Qasim with a part of
Jaipur, was ruled by Bhagra, a Ját, whence it is still called Bhigota.
The Rájputs of this tract are followers of a Muhammadan saint whose
shrine is at Nangal Teju in Bawal. They avoid the use of liquor and
use halál flesh, but preserve the belief in satis. A man may nou visit
his father-in-law's house unless invited and given a present of orua-
ments. The muklúwa is considered unnecessary when the parties are
young.
Of the various branches of the lunar race the Badgújar, Kachhwaha
and Shaikhawat khánps have a common descent. The former claim
descent from Lahu, son of Rám and Síta, and the Kachhwábas' ancestor
was created by Balmík out of kush grass. Kalájí, a Kachhwaha, had a
80p by the favour of Shaikh Burhan-ud-din, the Muhammadao saint, and
80 bis descendants are called Shaikháwats. They have 36 nakhs includ.
ing the Ratnáwat (descendants of Bhairon-ji), Dunáwat, Chandáwat and
Khach hrolia, of which the first is found in Nábha, though only in
small numbers. Ratnáwat women do not use the spinning wheel or
grind corn, and the men would rather starve than eat flour ground by
their women. Those who do so are excommunicated. All the Shaikh-
áwats are followers of Shaikh Burbán-ud-din, whose shrine is at
Jaipur. They bind a skin round a child's waist and only use halál
flesh according to the Shaikh's behests. Kachhwábás and Shaikháwats
do not intermarry, being descendants of one ancestor, The Badgújars
now marry with the Kachhwáhas, but not so the Sheikhawats. This
used not to be the case, but since they migrated to Rajputáoa it has been
the custom. A Kuchhwáha obief set the example by marrying a
Badgújar girl whom he met when hunting a tiger. Other Lunar branches
found in the State are the Jádú and Túnwar Rájputs. The former are
descended from Jaddu, one of the five sons of Rája Jajáti, 5th in
descent from the moon. They have a number of nakhs, of which the
Moktáwat (80 called because Sri Krishn, their ancestor, wore a mukat
or crown) is found in Nábhau They are disciples of Atri, from whom
their got is derived, and avoid marriage with the Bhattis, who are
a branch of their tribe. Tarís, the ancestors of the Tunwárs was
mon wo do so a Burhan
* These appear to be the Khichi of Cunningham's A, 8. R., II, pp. 294-301,
† Or Abargava,



290
The Rájputs of the Eastern plains.
the second son of Rájá Jajáti; they are agair divided into nakhs
and gols and though Jádú and Túnwar descend from a common
ancestor, yet they intermarry with one another, but Túnwars and
Játus do not intermarry. Once a Túnwar Rájá had a son who
was born with long hair and the pandits warped him that the boy
endangered bis life, so he was abandoned in the desert. A Láta
Brabman, however, declared that the birth was auspicious to the Rájá,
so he had the child traced. He was found sheltered by a hawk's (chil)
wings: one of the followers of the Rájá threw an arrow at the bird, it
flew away, and at the place where it alighted a temple was erected
to the bird as the goddess Chila. The boy was named Játú or
“long haired," and his descendants avoid killing & chíl and worship
the goddess. Their special parohits are Brahmans of the Láta got.
Rajputs pride themselves on the title of Thákur. Those born of slave
girls are said to be of the Suretwál got and also called Dároghas.
Unlike other Hindus, Rájput women often wear blue clotbes, but they
do not wear kanch or silver bracelets, only ivory ones. The women
avoid flesh and liquor, but not so the men. They will tako water
from the skin of a Muhammadan saqqa or water-carrier. Marriage is
consummated without waiting for the mukliwa and sometimes the pair
meet in the house of the girl's parents. The bride is not sent back to
her home three or four days after the wedding, and she is not allowed
to visit her parents until the bhora ceremony, which takes place some-
time after the wedding has been performed. But a wife goes to her
parents' house for her first confinement. Early marriage is no longer
practised.
The primary sub-division of the tribes is into thápas or thámbas, i.e.
groups of villages bound together by common descent. Sub-feudal
ties are still recognised, the village occupied by the descondants of the
common ancestor in the eldest line being, however small or reduced
in circumstances, still acknowledged as the bead. To this day, when
a headman dies, the other villages of the thápa assemble to install
his heirs, and the turban of the parent village is first tied on his
head. In old days the subordinate villages used to pay some small
chaudhráyát to the head village on the day of the great Diwali. The
head village is still called the great,' or 'turban' village, the téka
or village of origin, the tíka being the sign of authority formally
impressed in old days on the forehead of the heir of a deceased leader
in the presence of the assembled thápa. No village can change its
thápa. The imperial revenue system of the Mughals in adopting the
tribal thápa as one of its units somewhat wodified its constitution, but
the revenue thápas generally coincided with those of the tribe. In
addition to the limitations imposed on intermarriage with neighbours
there is a further restriction, imposed by the Rajputs, whereby no
man can marry into any family living in the thrpa into which his
father, grandfather or great grandfather married.* Thus if a Mandhár
Rajput married a Chauhan girl of thápa Juudla his son, grandson
and great-grandson would not be able to marry any Chauhan of
any village in the Jundla thápa. But beyond this and the normal
In Indri the Chauhans say they avoid their own byong or natural sept and got,
(Bachchas). and also their maternal grandfather's thamba in marriage. In Kaithal tho
Mandhárs avoid their own tribe and the maternal grandfathor's thamba.



291
The Rájputs of the Eastern plains.
prohibition against marrying within the clan, the Rájputs have in
general no further limitations on intermarriage.*
The Rájpul migrations.-The Rájput traditions say that the Chandel
once held Kaithal and Samána and ruled the neighbouring tract from
Kohand, that the Barau Rájputs held the country round Asandb,
Safídon and Salwan, and the PUNDIRS that round Thánesar and the
Nardak. The latter were however expelled by the CAAUHÁN who
made Sundla their headquartors : and occupied a great part of the
Nardak together with large possessions in the Doáb.t
The two former tribes, i. e. the Chande. and Barah, were at appar-
ently the same time expelled by the Mandahár who settled in Jind
and made their capital Kaláyat, now in Patiala. I
* Among the Túnwar Rájputs of Karnál girls may be given to Mandhárs, Chauhans
etc., but the idea is that the part of the country from which Túnwars get their wives ought
to be avoided. For this purpose the Tunwur villages are divided into thambas (pillars) :
for instance, the thamba of Lukhi comprises the villages of Lukhi, Chanarheri, Bhusthála
and Jalberi : Pharal thamba includes those of Pharal, Bipur, Chandlana, Sudpur, Kathwa :
Tangaur thamba has Tangaur, Kalsana and Dhakala. To take an example, the Tánwar
girls of Bhusthála are married in Rajaund to Mandhár Rájputs; the Lukhi Rájputs cannot
then take girls from Rajaund. Moreover, the bhánji (sister's daughter) and dohiti
daughter's daughter) are avoided. If it be found that the girl is descended, however remote.
ly, from a Túnwar woman of the thamba sho cannot be taken in marriage. To take a
concrete example, a Bhusthála girl was married at Bahúna; her daughter was married at
Baras ; the Baras girl at Baragaun; the Baragaun girl was betrothed to a man in Lukhi and
on this being discovered the Baragaun people raised objections and the nai came to say that
the alliance could not be completed; it had to be broken off.
In this case the origin of the rule seems clear. There is a danger of marrying a woman
who may be descended, through females, from a common ancestor. The number of gots
amongst the Rajputs being few, only the father's got need be avoided, but the thainba
system appears to effectively prevent all risk of interbreeding.
Lukhi appears to owe its pre-eminence to the existence there of the tomb of Cháchu
from whom and his brother Singhan all the Túnwars are descended. Cháchu was made a
Muhammadan by some king but bis tomb is in Lukhi, a Hindu village, and he is greatly
respected by tho Hindu villagers of the place. When a wedding procession returns to the
village the pair visit the tomb before entering their own house, do obeisance to it and offer
a rupee. So too when any girl of the village is married a rupee is offered to it. Every
Thursday lamps are lit and vows made at it. When illness breaks out Túnwars, both
Hindu and Muhammadan, offer the first day's pickings of every cotton-field at the tomb ;
and it is visited by Túnwars from Chila Pattan, described as lying to the south-west in the
Wilayat Des, or "home-land,' towards Márwar. While Hindu Túnwars, says Sir James
Douie, marry into got except their own, Muhammadan Túnwars are only debarred from
marrying a paternal uncle's daughter. The Márkanda Bet is occupied by Mubammadan
Túpwars while the Hindus hold villages further south in Thánesar ilaqa where the land
is less valuable. All the Túnwars of those parts are Bisgarpat by got, Túnwar being the
al or beong (original stock) of the tribe : P. N. Q., I, § 540.
† The Chauhans in Karnál all claim descent from Ráná Har Rai. He had been bathing
in the Ganges and returned through the Kurukshetra, where he fell into a quarrel with
the Pundirs. He founded Jundla in 891 Sambat. = 834 A. D., but had to call in his uncles
to aid him in finally conquering the Pundirs, and they founded or acquired groups of
villages. The Chauhans will take the daughters of Pandirs in marriage but will not give
them brides.
The accounts however do not all agree, as it is also said that in very early days the
Mandabár were settled about Sámána, for Firoz Shah chastised them and made many of
them Muhammadans. When they first came into what is now the Karnál District, they
drove the Chandel out of Kohand and Gharaunda, but were obliged to relinquish them and
their final occupation of Asandh, Gharaunda and Safídon was probably effected from Kaláyat.
Ono bardic legend gives precise details. It makes the Mandahár descendants of Lao
Kumar, son of Rám Chand and adopted son of his uncle Lachhman. Lao ruled in various
placos, including Ajudbia, and came to visit the Kurukshetr. At a tirath near Jind his wife
boro a gon, Jindbra, who founded Jind in 891 Sambat=834 A. D. and his grandson
8ádh wrested Kaithal from the Chandel in 1093. Sádh's son Bampra begot Kalla and Kolu
who founded Kalayat and Rajaundh, and Mámráj who settled in Kaithal. Kálla's son
Rána Gurkha took the forts of Asapdh, Safídou and Salwán from the Baráh Rajputs.
settling in the first named in 1131 Sambat.



292
The Rájputs of the Central Punjab.
t by traditiMahábhárata war to the Jullundur D. the
The Túnwars originally held Pánipat and the country roond, and
they do not seem to have been dispossessed till the early days of the
Muhammadan conquest. They once held the whole Naili tract but
were driven out of part of it by the Mandahárs. They now hold the
Bet or lowland of the Márkanda, with many villages in the Pehowa
pargana of Kaithal and their country is popularly known 88
Tubarwára.
D.-THE RAJPUTS OF THE CENTRAL PUNJAB.
The Rajputs of the Central Punjab are connected with the Rájpats
of Rajputána, at least by tradition. Although a legend preserved by
tradition states that after the Mahabharata war Susarma Chandra, a
Somababsi Rájput who had beld Multán, retired to the Jullundur Doáb
and there founded a kingdom which comprised the Trigartta, i. e. the
country watered by the three rivers, the Sutlej, Beás and Rávi, and
was also called Jalandhara, the Rajputs do not look to the hills for
their origins, but to Udaipur or Jaipur, Mathura and Ajudbia. But
with few exceptions these traditions rest upon the slanderest of founda-
tions. No historical records link up the ancient history of the central
districts with the early history of the Rajput clans which have from
time to time set up a sort of semi-independence or acquiesced in feudal
recognition of a central authority. However fortunes may have
fluctuated the right of internecine war has almost invariably existed,
even if it was not formally recognised by the suzerain power.
It is impossible to say which is the oldest Rajput tribe of this area, so
vague and conflicting are the tribal legends. Thus the tradition of the
Ghorewába Rajputs is that in Sambat 1130 or 1070 A.D., two brothers
Ahwaha or Hawáha and Kachwáha, came from Kot Kurmán or Udaipur
and obtained a grant of territory from Muhammad of Ghor, but he
did not invade India till a century later. But the true Kachwába
Rajputs belonged to Jaipur, not Udaipur, and so Purser was driven to
suggest that Kot Kurman was only a general term for the seat of the
Kachwaba,* kurma and kachwa both meaning 'tortoise.' But Purser
also proposed to identify the Ghorewáha with the Hárá, a branch of the
Chanhán not found in the modern Punjab, though they may possibly
have given their name to the Hariána, and it is noteworthy that their
bards, who still visit them periodically, come from Kotah and Búudi in
Rajputána, where the Hárs are to be found.
The Ghorewaha have at least 12 muhins or septs of which the follow-
ing are found in Jullundur :-Rajpál, Sedsúr, Bhinsi or Bhímsi, Sahnpál
(or Sahn Chand) and Díp. The Sard, Aju and Rájpur septs are found
in Hoshiarpur, the Bhúp and Ladha in Ambála, and the Maint and
Salkbo in Ludhiana. The original territory of the Ghorewaha is said to
have been bounded in the north-east by that of the Jaswál, on the
south-west by the Manj and by the Náru.
The Náru Rájputs hold some villages ip Jullundur which form &
sort of intermediate zone between the Manj and Ghorewáha, though
The Mandahárs held 360 kherax or villages between Kalayat and Gharaunda, but many
of them are now held by Játe. Another story is that the Safſdon Mandabárs obtained the
villagos now held by them in the Nardak by intermarriage with the Chaubans in compara.
tively recent times. O
* Kachchh wálá is a corruption of Kachchhap gbáta.
+ Thus the Ghorowába have a Main sept, but the Manj bavo not.



(at p. 16 Naru Shah, andalihi was sent the country.*
The Rájputs of the Central Punjab.
293
they are mostly found in the north of the Jullundur tahsil on the
Hoshiarpur border. A variant of the account already given of them
(at p. 161, supra) makes Rája Tilochan, father of Nihal Chand
otherwise Naru Shah, and says Tilochan having applied for help in a
civil war to the king of Delhi was sent to conquer the Punjab, which
he did, and in return was made ruler of the country.*
The Manj Rajputs give the following table of their descent :-
Sáliváhan, 26th in descent from Krishna.
34 sons, including Bisals, ancestor of the Bhattis.
Rána Jundal, 7th in descent from Bísal, ruler of Bhatner.
Jagpal.
Achbal, founded Jaisalmer,
Chun Sen.
Sen or Dhan.
Bhatti.
Manj.
Mokbal 9th in descent from Manj, founded Hathór in Ludhiana.
Wairsi (ancestor
Mailsi,
Jairsi.
of the Nawabs
of Kot Isa).
The Manj of Tulsi Dás, alias
Malsián
Shaikh Chácho.
with 27 villages.
Rai Jít, founded
Tulwan on the Sutlej,
the head township
of 360 villages
in Jullundur.
An offshoot of the Tżlwan family held Nakodar with 227 villages.
The Manj also held Bárápind, a group of 12 villages near Phagwára.
The Grand Trunk road approximately separates the Manj or Manjki
Country from the Dhak.t
But the Manj genealogists go further and include among the 84
sons of Sáliváhan Tavesar, ancestor of the Túnwars, and Ras Tavas.
ancestor of the Táonis in Ambala. But Bathúr or Athúr in Ludhiana
is universally regarded as the original seat of the race and Tulsi Dás
as the first to settle there. Hathúr, doubtless originally Arhatpur, inay
have been a famous place in Jain or Buddhist times, but its occupation
by the Manj can hardly have been of very great antiquity for his
* The central Punjab is full of places associated with Rajput legends. Thus Shekhopur
near Kapurthala is said to have been the old capital' of the Bhatti Rajputs Phillaur
was originally called Phúlnagar after Phul, a Sanghera Ját, who founded it Bis brother
Nág founded Nagaura, now Nagar, near by. Subsequently Phillaur was occupied by a
Náru Raiput. Rai Shahr whose territory extended from Máu to Selkiána, and when Rai Ratn
Pál abandoned Mau and settled in Phillaur the Játs left it. The Rajputs too eventually
deserted it. But the Náru tradition is that Ratn Pál was a son of Náru Shah or Nihat
Chand.
+ In Jullundur the whole country to the east and north-east of Phagwára is called the
Dardhak or Dardhak: P. N. Q., I, § 132. In the reign of Alamgir the Dardak mahal
included two tarafs, Ráhon and Phillaur : ibid. $ 478. Mr. D. G. Barkley, however, notes
that the Mani ki Dárdak of the Ain-z. Akhari evidently corresponded with what is now called
the Dhak, comprising the Ráhon tahsil, the eastern part of Phillaur tahsil, and part of
Phagwara (in Kapúrthala): ib. & 372. But elsewhere he states that the Dardak mahal
had Rábon as its capital and included Nawashahr tahsil with parts of Phillaur: III, 8 678.



simply Chhat. Hages of the bronce over, or is held A
294
Gradations of Rájput villages. i
descendants who founded Kot Isa Khan and Raikot only rose to con.
sequence during the decay of the Delhi empire.
THE RÁJPUT tika, chhat and makán VILLAGES.
The word chhat is explained as an abbreviation of chhatar and
an equivalent to táj or crown. It may possibly be translated canopy.
The canopy used to be one of the insignia of sovereigu power. A
chhat-makán is a village which enjoys a pre-eminence over, or is held in
special veneration by, the other villages of the brotherhood (barádari).
It=is generally called simply chhat. A makán is a village of lower grade
than a chhat. Chhats and makáns appear to be confined to the Rájputs.
The title of makán is earned for a village by some person's perform-
ing a meritorious deed at a wedding or & funeral and it is then said
of it that' village so-and-so is a makán,' koi lallu panju gaon nahin
hai- it is not an ordinary village, but a famous place.
Tika is the title of the heir-apparent to a reigning prince. Hence
it is applied to villages which are the seats of a prince's rule. It
would appear that a chhat makán was originally a lika, a tika being
a village which is the seat of a house still actually ruling or exercising
authority in some way.
The chhat or makán comes into prominence at weddings. · At the
wedding of a tika, bháji is first distributed among the barádari. Then
a Brahm bhoj is performed and all the barádari feasted. In this feast
all the headmen of the villages, in which the tika has taluqdári rights,
take part, and each then presents a rupee as nazr to the tika. During
the milni, 5 animals, including a horse, a sbawl and some money are given
to the tika's father by the bride's father, who also makes presents of
cash and clothes to the near relatives of the tika, his more distant
relatives getting a rupee only. On the lika's part a sagi 'ornament),
gandú (a check scarf) and other clothes are given to the bride.*
Rajputs resident in a chhat or makán have to maintain their social
prestige by lavish expenditure at weddings, etc. If a leading member
of the village dies, a great deal is spent in feasting for 10 days all
who come to condole with his family. Mirásis, Bháts and barbers
from other chhat, makan or tika villages also receive heavy fees at
weddings, etc., according to the status of their chhats, etc., eg. the
Mirási of a chhat will get a rupee, that of a makán annas 8 while
those of ordinary villages only receive one or two annas.
The Ghorewaha Råjputs hare 9 chhat and 12 makán, and these
villages do not seem to have any relation to the genealogical divi-
sions of the tribe, which is also divided into 12 muhins or sepis,
depending on descent.
In Gurgann each Rájput tribe has its chhat, with one, or more,
apparently subordinate makáns. The Deputy Commissioner furnishes
a list of 23 tribes which have numerous chhats or makáns, and states
that six months at least would be required to obtain a complete liste
In Karnal and Hissár the system appears to be unknown, but in
Ambála, Ludhiána and Patiala it is in full force. Originally there
were, it is said, six Rájput darbárs or courts,' at Kapurthala (of the
d be required chhats or makroner furnished
• Harira, defined as a kind of pap made of flour and milk, also appears to be given



*
• Rájputs' in the Western Punjab.
295
Bhattis), Talwandi, Hathúr, Kot Isa Khán (Manj), Bhatner and Jaisal-
mir. In lieu of these, in the reign of Babur 12 chhats and 24 makáns
were coustituted, but the numbers soon increused to 36 and 35 respec-
tively, and the lists obtained show that the present numbers must be far
larger. Each tribe has a certain number of chhat and makán and the
member of a chhat always pays twice as much to the mirásis at a daugh-
ter's marriage as the member of a makán.* But the fees vary in each
tribe, thus the Baráh Rajputs have 12 chhats (paying Re. 1 to each mi-
rási) and 24 makúns (paying As, 8). The Taonis have 14 chhats
(paying Rs. 7) and 24 maká 18 (paying Rs. 3-8). The Chaubáns have
12 makáns (paying formerly Rs. 11, but now Re. 1 only), but no chhats,
and the Rao and Debia too have, it seems, makáns only.
THE TERM RAJPUT IN THE WESTERN PUNJAB.
It may be doubted whether the term Rájput is really indigenous to
the western Punjab at all, and it is certainly a foreign word to the
west of the Indus. There the corresponding term is Patrán or BALOCH
and any tribe which is lowly or middling status may be promoted to
the dignity of affiliation to the Pathán or Baloch tribe into which it is
incorporated, and it then acquires full status as such, East of the
Indus even in Baháwalpur,t which adjoins the Rájputána descent on
the west, the distinction between Rajput and Ját is in truth unknown
and such tribes as the Sumras, Sammas, Samejas, Dahrs and Kharls
might be with equal accuracy classed either as Játs or as Rájputs.
T'he Joiyas and Wattús, who are almost entirely confined to the Übha,
i.e. to Minchinábad and Khairpur East, are the only tribes in this State
which can be at all correctly styled Rájput, because they belong to
the Sutlej valley, not to that of the Indus. In all the Districts on
the left bank of the Indus there is no marked line of cleavage between
Rájput and Ját and it is only when we get to the Jhelum hills that we
find the former term in popular use. Thus, according to Mr. W. S.
Talbot, 'a small number of Panwars, Chibhs, and Sohlans are found in
the Jhelum tushil : the former live in the Pabbi, while the Chibhs and
Sohlans hold a few of the river villages above Jhelum. All three claim
to be Rajputs, and are so regarded by their neighbours : the claim is
probably correct. There are also the fair number of Bhattis scattered
about the District, who are probably of Rájput extraction : but they
are here unpretentious hard-working cultivators, and little esteemed
socially. The Gondals along the river are a more doubtful case ; they
do not always say they are Rájputs, and seem more like the ordinary
Játs; they are fond of cattle-lifting. There are few Siáls in the
south-west corner of the District, who are generally admitted to be
Punwar Rajputs. A few others such as the Khíwas have some pre-
tensions to Rajput origin, and locally rank rather above the Játs: their
origin is doubtful.' But these tribes are all immigrants from the
eastward. The term Rájput is replaced among the dominant tribes of
* In pargana Nárnaul there is a curious rule. When the father of the cridegroom
gives a house full of all requisites to miráni it is called tyáy : when he only gives a fixed
sum for the house it is called lekh or account.
of Two sayings are current in this tract; one runs : kul chhit-putar-dá, sardár Abra
he, ie 'of all the petticoat. wearing tribes ABRA is chief, because the women of the Cháchar
Khokhar, Máchhi, Mahr, Samma and Tarali tribes wear the petticoat. The other is: kuk
ghaghe da sardár Baloch he : 1;6. 'the Baloch are the chief of the tribes whose women wear
the ghagha, or long shift.'



296
The Rájputs of the Bár.
imu hills bly beca put. They are sthe Dhani rank, i
the District by Sano. Even the tribes of middle rank, like the Kahút,
Kasar and Mair, who now belong to the Dhani country in Chakwal
tabsil, a part of the Salt Range, are sometimes said io be Awan, but
never apparently Rájput. Their bards indeed claim for them a Mughal
origin, probably because they say that, although they came from the
Jammu hills, they joined Babar's army and were located by him in
their present seats which were then almost upinhabited. Even the
more respectable among the Mair only. aspire, according to Ibbetson,
to the title of Manhás which is no doubt the same word as the well-
known Manhás tribe described at p. 274 above, and not to the title
of Rájput. In Ráwalpindi the status of Rajput is no doubt claimed
by several tribes, though Sahu is here too the term for gentry,'
and though the claim to that status is expressed by saying that the
Dhunds, for instance, are a hill tribe of Rajput origin and claim
such descent, yet they ihemselves assert that they are descended from
Abbás and they are certainly classed as Sáhu. A similar remark
applies to the Sattis. Even the oldest tribes in the Murree hills do not
appear to claim a Kájput origin. They resemble the Sattis rather than
the Dhunds, but do not aspire to the rank of Sáhu, as they do.
But as we go eastward into the heart of the Punjab we find not only
the term Rajput in general use but also that its traditional branches are
known. Thus the Chadrars of the Sandal Bár claim to be Solar Rájputs,
like the Túnwars,* while the Wazirs and Kharrals, like the Punwars,
say they are Agnikul. T'he cháp or ballad, given at p. 158 of Vol. II
which Sir E. D. Maclagan recorded, shows that the Chadrars' claim
is not a mere afterthought, put forward in answer to an official demand
for information, but one preserved by their mirásis or genealogists.
The following ballad describes the birth of Bhatti. It comes from a
Bhatti Mírási, or a mírási of the Bhattis, of a village in Hábzábad
tahsil. It is curious to find that it mentions the name of Jádú under
the form Jádab or Jádam, as this adds support to the theory that the
Jádust represent the Jádavas.
The following description of the birth of Bhatti is given by a Bhatti
Mirási of Pakkádalla tahsil Hafizábád) :-
Gorakh tappea te Jadab chela
Goraknáth was an ascetic and Jadú was
his pupil
Bans vjáre te rahe akela
He lived solitarily in the desert.
Rájá Nil Pawár dá
Thieves broke into
Ghar bhanna chorá ;
Nil Pawar Raja's house ;
Khetr khádá mireá ; :
Deer ate his fields ;
Sir a hora.
The punishment came on othors' heads.
A pápí, Jádáb
The evil Rája camo: and
Phar súlí ditta.
Seized and hung Jádú.
Sachrhi jagga suchcha tole,
The place was good, his calibre was good,
Súlí chaſhita múh na bole.
Even wben being hung, he said not a word.
* The Kethwal have an old traditica to the effect that, at a time when they held the
whole of the Mur: ee hills, on of the women named Abh, eloped with a man to the other
side of the Jhelum. Nearly all the able-bodied men of the tribe went in pursuii. They
came to a frozen lake which they mistook for h.id ground, and settled down upon it for the
night and lit their fires ; this melted the ice, and they were all engulfed. In the meantimo
the Dhunds came down upon their undefended hom stead, and destroyed what remained
of the tribe. Hence this proverb: Abh luro to sabh chhoro. “Go in search of Abh, and
give up all."
et It may be noted that Jádú appears in the Sháhnáma as the name of a Persian tribe and
Jadustán as a country distinct from Hindustán. But the possibility of a connection cannot
be discussed. Soo P. N. Q. I., $ 709.



& Bhatti ballad.
297
The Rájá hears that his daughter will bring forth a son who will
kill him : 80 he turns her out and tells her to marry the faqir who has
been hung.
Hukm húe, “ Ghatt kotha,
The Rájá ordered: “Make your house here,
Ban girán, chaun chakke
Count this a village : on all sides
Jad Jádam dána,"
It will be called after Jádú."
Jádam súli chayhea,
Jádú was hanging,
Kol át Ráni.
The queen came up.
" Tú Rájá dá ki bharea
She said : “What have you done to the Rijk
Jai kett aukhi,"
That he should persecute you so p"
" Játú váhndi ráh:
He said : “Sit you down,
Bah Allah nú saúpi."
I have given you to God's hand."
Suddh át: jal khelea : vaddi vadáth : She believed: his seed fell* : a wonderful
thing:
Sir chohea : pet hámla : Ráni jása Antakh. It fell on her head: she conceived: the
queen brought forth Autakh (i.e., Bhatti).
Rani wáh chall tagir.
The queen went in distress,
Shaihró tur peil.
From the city.
Hart puttha gerie
If a well were turned round the wrong way,
Chúr dohá pur.
All the gear would break.
Bhatti jammea Abohar Mahmúdpur,
Bhatti was born at Abobar Mahmúdpur. .
Duá kart Rinmáwati
Kinmáwatit (the Queen) gave thanks
Rabb sachche agge.
To the true God.
Bárá baras guzáre,
Twelve years went by,
Lagg utthi dhande :
She was occupied entirely in this task ;
Pak Parwar Rahmúna
God the Pure, Protector, Merciful,
Rabb parde kajje.
Shielded her.
Cháti mári nir di
(The young Bhatti) threw a gharra of water
down.com
Ghore te munas gajje ;
The (clay) horses and men gave a sound ;
Chattar chaşhaea Bhattiá.
The Bhattis raised their canopies
Takhsáló agge.
The year before.
The same Mirásí gave the following song about the Bhattis and
their kinsmen the Sámíl:
Bhatti kaise Rajput,
Bhattis are Rajputs,
Jaise Dillt sajáde,
Such as the princes in Delhi;
Ae hajj gujárde
They came after pilgrimage,
Paighambar-záde.
Sons of the Prophet.
Bhattián nú 6t sachche Rabbdi,
The shadow of God is over the Bhattis,
Sharmi kot vasende,
They inbabit forts with virtue.
8&mil nú sám Rhudá di,
Samil|| has the protection of God,
Panjá pirá di pakkar :
He has the help of the Five Pírs :
Majjh, gái, ghoria,
Buffaloes, cows, mares,
Gheo tulle trakkar:
Ghi weighed in the balance :
War Sámil.te nai mahelián
The Sámil's fortune is such that people
como everywhere,
Lai milde Rá Thandál nú,
To meet R& Thandal (Sámil),
Gal paggá te hattha chhelia.
With their turbans round their necks and
she-goats in their hands (as offerings).
Barwása dallvich belia.
In battle he trusts in his brethren.
Bhatti is said to have been a Musalmán, but Shaikh Sámil is also
said to have been the first to convert the Bhattis to Islám. Rá
Tbandál was a Sámil of Kot Bhái Khán beyond Kirána. The five Pírs
are given as : Shaikh Sámail, Shah Daulat, Shah Fateh Ali, Pír Fatteh
Khan and Shah Murád-all Bhaçţi saints.
* Cf. N. I. N. Q., 1891, $ 570.
+ In Tod's Rájasthán, ii, 189 (Cal. Edn.), Kamarwati is represented as an ancestross,
some way back, of Bhatti, not as his mother.
This is a stock incident in Punjab folk-lore.
$Bhatti is supposed to have created an army of real horses and men from clay images,
In the Ber the Sámil, Máneke, Jaloke, Jandráke, Bhagsí, Kahár, Muta mal, Dachchi and
Baada aro gaid to be Bhattis. The Dachchi however marry with the Chadr ar, but not with
tha. Bhagsi or Jandrákos although those two tribes are also Bhattis.



298
Origins of the Rajputs.
THE RAJPUT GROUPS AND THEIR ORIGINS.
The Rájputs of the Punjab may be broadly grouped, as Ibbetson
grouped them, into four territorial groups. First come the Rajputs of
the Delhi Territory and the Jumna valley, for the most part belonging
to the two great tribes of Túnwar and Chauhan which gave Delhi its
most famous dynasties. Next come the Rájputs of the river valleys
of the Western Plains, many of them hardly or not at all to be dis-
tinguished from Játs and belonging for the most part to the Bhatti
of Jaisalmer and Bíkáner, and their predecessors the Punwar. The
third group is the Rajput of the western hills, including the Salt
Kanga, including both dominant tribes of proud position such as the
Janjua and Mongul Rajputs from the Jammu hills, and descendants
either of Yádúbansi (Bhatti) dynasty of Kasbmír and the mythical
Rájá Rasálu of Siálkot, so famous in Punjab folk-lore, or of a group of
tribes, apparently of Punwár origin, which now bold the hills on either
bank of the Jhelum. Finally we have the Rájputs of the Kangra
hills of whom the Katooh may be taken as the type, so ancient that
their very origin and advent to their present abodes are lost in the
past; and the Rajputs of the lower hills wbich fringe the Punjab
Himalayas. To these must, however, be added the Rájputs of the
Central Punjab, mainly represented by the Siáls, Bhattis and kindred
tribes of the Sandal Bár, but these hardly form a fifth group.
Ibbetson expressly refrained from noticing the Rájputs of the Sikh
tract, of the central districts, and of the Phulkián States. In the
latter the Rajputs are, however, of some importance, especially in
those territories, acquired by the States after 1857, which lie on the
borders of Rájputána. In tbe Sikh tracts, the districts round Labore
and Amritsar, the Rajput is found in depressed communities, scattered
representatives of such tribes as are found upon its borders, though
the Khokhars, the Manj and a few others have held their ground
fairly well in tracts where Sikhism was not so well established as it was
in the Ját tracts.
The Rájput elements are however by no means represented solely by
the tribes which style themselves Rájputs or are recognised as such.
In the territory about Delhi we find a number of tribes now Ját, but
claiming Rajput origin, and besides those tribes like the GAUBWA or
Gaur which terms appear to be merely a refinement of GÁŘÁ, or half-
caste, as opposed to sáú or pure. In precisely the same fashion we find
tribes of impure descent recognised, more or less, as Gakkhars in the
Rawalpindi hills, where the TRUND take the place of the Gaurwah in
the south-east of the Province. The conditions in the plain country
along the Jammu border are much the same, but in the Kangsa hills
we find the principles on which the Rájput system is based in full
working order. Below and yet belonging to the Rájput as a 'caste'
stand the Ráthis or Thákkars and even the Ráwat, Kanet and Ghirth.
In the rest of the eastern Himalayas the Kanet is separated from the
Rajput by a more strictly defined line, but he is often of Rajput descent.
The sirtora represents the Trund or Gárá and re-appears in Sialkot as
the chhatrora of the Manhás.
To describe the various theories regarding the origins of the
Rajput would be in itself a very heavy task, and it is impossible to
say what value should be attachel to the attempts made to explain



299
as the cene Bats' or Bache as late as
y reclares the unkanauj reporthe Vatsen in document the were
avaras of to a Kochand them to belocomme out, intinst the analinikula
Rájput origins.
the legends which make some of them Solar, others Lunar and others
again Agnikula. The origin of this last term is variously described.
According to the Rajput bards the Chauhan is one of the four Agnikula
or ' fire-sprung' tribes who were created by the gods in the anali kund
or 'fountain of fire' on Mount Abu to fight against the Asuras or
demons. But, as Cunningham* pointed out, this claim must be of
comparatively modern date as the common gotra-charya of all the
Chauhan tribes declares them to be of the Bats or Bach gotra and Fell's
inscription of Jai Chand of Kanauj records a grant made as late as
1177 A. D. to a Kshatriya, said to be of the Vatsa gotra with the five
pravaras of Bhargava, Jamadagnya, etc. Froin this document then we
learn that the Chauhaps laid no claim to be sprung from fire, but were
content to be regarded as descendants of the sage Bhrigu through
Jamdagnya Vatsa. Similarly none of the numerous inscriptions of
the Chalukya or Solanki family ailudes to this fable of their origin.
The first appearance of the fire-pit' legend is in Chand's Prithvíráj-
ráisá which claims to be contemporary with its hero who was killed in
1193 A.D. (J. R. A. S. 1909; p. 247).
Again according to a famous bard of the Khichi Chauhans the
Solanki sprang from Brahma's essence and so was named Chaluk
Rao, the Punwár from Sira's essence and the Parihár from Devi's, while
Cháhuwán sprang up from the fount of fire and wandered forth, of
chosen race This would make the Chauhan the only fire-sprung race.
Cunningham also says that the Parihár is universally admitted to be
one of the four Agnikulas, but as we have seen his place is taken in
Punjab tradition by the Sonkhla, and in Rájputána itself it is sometimes
ascribed to the Rathor.
When however we come to history we are on much firmer ground
though the materials are as yet very fragmentary. There appears to
be very little doubt that the Túnwar represent, in name, the ancient
Tomara, a tribe or dynasty which was subdued by a Cháha mána, the
son of Vákpati I of Málava, about 950 A. D. About the beginning
of the 15th century the Tomara gave a dynasty to Gwalior. The
Chahamána were undoubtedly the predecessors in title of the Chauhans.
They had founded a dynasty at Ajmer long before 950 A. D.||
With equal certain ty the Punwárs are to be identified with the
Paramáras who rose to power in Málava about 825 A. D. They were
probably a branch of the Paramára rulers of Achalgadh or Mount
Abu. Aboat 950 A. D. Sri Harshadeva, Siyaka II or Simhabhata
(Singh Bhat in modernised form), Paramára of Málave conquered
a king of the Kshatriya Hiņas. I
* A. 8. R., II, p. 253-4. It is less easy to follow Cunningham in his derivation of
Agnikula from Analwára Patn or anala, fire, because a Chauhan cow.herd named Anala
pointed out its site to the Solanki king Vana Rája.
of Op. cit., p. 255.
It is tempting to suggest a connection between the Tomara and Toramána, the leader,
with Mihirakula, of the Huns c. 290 A. But there is absolutely no warranty for any more
than & suggestion, though the Tomaras themselves appear to bave advanced the claim : seo
Vol. II, p. 310.
$ Duff's Chronology of India, p. 306. The accepted belief in a Tomara dynasty of Kanauj
bas been shown to be unfounded : J. R. A, 8., 1909, p. 54.
Ibid. pp. 277-8,
Ibid., pp. 74, 800 and 92,



800
The Gujar origin of the Rájputs.
The foundation of the Chandel or Chandella dynasty dates back to
about the game period for we first hear of it in c. 831 A, D, when Nánika
overthrew the Parihárs of Mahola and founded the Chandella dynasty,
which by 955 extended from the Jumpa in the north to the Chedi
frontiers in the south, and from Kálinjar in the east to Gwalior in the
north-west.*
The question of the origins of these Rájput tribes raises the most
difficult problems connected with the early ethnology of India. The
Chandels were probably of Gond origin, but claim descent from the
moon by its union with a Brahman maiden.t The suggestion advanced
in Vol. II, p. 152 supra, that they ary of the same stock as the Chandál
must be rejected for the very simple reason that a ruling tribe or dynasty
would speedily divest itself of any name likely to recall an out-caste
origin. But the other Rájput tribes are of much more certain origin.
Seeing that “the Gurjara origin of the Parihárs has been proved con-
clusively," writes Mr. Vincent Smith, a strong presumption has been
made that the three other fireborn' (agnikula) clans, viz., the Solanki
or Chalakya, the Pawar or Paramára and the Chaubán or Cháhamana,
must be of like origin. To these Hoernle would add the Tomaras
(Túnwars) and Kachhwáhas, for very good reasons. Hence we arrive
at the conclusion that the great mass of the Punjab Rajputs, excluding
perhaps those of Kángra, are of Gurjara descent and as, Mr. Vincent
Smith says, no one could think of doubting the identity of the modern
caste name Gujar with Gujara, the spoken form of Gurjara. Strange
as this theory will appear to many it holds the field for the present.
It may, however, be pointed out that the mere fact that Rajput tribes
hear Gurjara names is not conclusive proof that they are of Gurjara
blood. We have just heard of a Kshatriya Húna and it is quite
possible that the indigenous tribes adopted Gurjara names when their
founders were enfief'd by Gurjara rulers. With this suggestion the
question must be left where it now stands.
A still more difficult question is the origin of the Bhattis, Dogars,
Naipals and various other tribes which claim Rájput origins and are
certainly of Rájput status. The word Bhata occurs frequently in
compound names. For example a Nágabhata I claims to have
conquered the Mlechha armies, probably the Muhammadan invaders
of Sindh, and he belonged to the race which bore the Pratihára
banner. The Bhațţi in Baháwalpur have a Pahor sept, which
looks like a variant of Panwar. But the present writer is by no means
convinced that the Bhattis are a homogeneous class. They claim to be
Lunar Rájputs, yet their kinsmen the Sámil, who are also described
as a class of the Bhattis, are said to be Solar. To his mind the
Bhattis are a confederation of various stocks which formed itself liko
Smith says. "Gujar with Go many it holds
. Ibid., pp. 75 and 92. For a full account of the Hist. and Coinage of the Chandel
Dynasty by Mr. Vincent Smith, see Ind. Ant., 1908, p. 114 et seq.
† V. Smith, op. cit., pp. 137 and 136..
* In J. R. A. S. 1909, pp. 53-75. Mr. Vincent Smith thus accepts Hoornle's conclusions,
wiih one exception. He regards the Játs as identical in origin with the Gnjars. But
Hoernle, with whom the present writer concurs, regards the Játs as belonging to an earlier
(Indo-Aryan) stratum of immigration : ibid. p. 142.
SJ, R. A. 8., 1909, p. 58. Ferishta mentions a Bhattia Rája as an ally of Jaipál: p. 9
of Briggs' translation



The Rájput a foreigner.
801
the Meus, the Gaddis of Kángra and the Kanets, and in precisely the
same way as the Patháns and Baloch, out of the debris of various Rajput
and other affiliated tribes. The Dogar traditions are conflicting but
Purser is probably right in saying that one part of the tribe is Punwar
and other Chauhan.* Like the Naipáls they are akin to the Lodies.
Anyone who will read the articles on Dogra, Gaddi, Kanet, Meo and
others will see that fusion plays a very important part in the formation
of the so called Punjab tribes and that there is a strong tendency from
time to time for new federations to evolve in a more or less well defined
area under strong local chiefs aided by the pressure of circumstances,
It remains to call attention to one curious fact. The Punjab Raj.
put tribes owe their names to dynasties which all arose to power beyond
its borders. To some extent this supports the theory of their arti-
ficial origin. They do not appear to have settled in the present seats as
conquering tribos from the north-west, but to have sprung from feudal
or semi-sovereign chiefs who rose to power under the great kingdoms
which fell finally before the Muhammadan invaders. Even before that
epoch internecine warfare between rival local potentates had been
the normal condition of India, but the dominant dynasty appears to
have generally left the fiefs of conquered pobles in the hands of their
descendants, and the settlements of tribes, like the Chauhant in the
Jumna valley and elsewhere, doubtless date from the epoch of their
political supremacy at Delhi. No doubt the rise and fall of each new
dynasty led to tribal migrations so that the present seats of these
tribes are not identical with their original fiefs, and they have been
broken up and dispersed. Nevertheless they contrived to retain control
of fairly definite areas with some degree of tribal authority within them.
The chronology of the Rájputs' ascendancy at Delhi is preserved in
the well-known popular rhyme.
But latter-day erudition, in the Sandal Bár, has improved upon this
version, and the grandfather of the present faqir of Shaikh Sábu I in
that traet made the following rhyme about the fortunes of Delhi :-
Awal Dilli Túri ghar apne pát:
First the Túnwars brought Delhi into their
possession :
Phir leilsi Goriá kuchk mudd nasái: Then the Ghors took it and remained for
some timo:
Phir leit Patháná khushang lagár : Then the Patháns took it and enjoyed them.
selves :
Phir leid Chau đã ghar tee ái:
Then the Chauhans, the third house that
camo:
Phir leit Båbar ke Chaughetteá, kar sár Then Bábar's Chughattás, smiting with
kutát.
sword in hand.
billi tô Shahadded mittkhah ham đã đi : At Delhi princes have been over at strife :
Dilli sadá nawarni; jis ratdt dhari lawái : Delhi is always a young woman, who has
put on a coronet of blood :
Kahe faqir Murid, jis yih cháp banái, Saith faqir Muríd, who made this poem.
Vol. II, p. 245.
+ These tribes are pot of course wholly confined to the Jumpa valley. For example, the
Chauhan are also important in the west of the Hoshiarpur District, bolding a chaurási or
84 villages round Sham Chaurasi and another about Zahúra. This settlement may represent
an old Ohauhán military colony settled below the Siwiliks to keep in check the tribes of the
Himalayan area, just as Afghán colonies were cantoned in this very tract at a later epoch;
nr it may be relic of an unknown Chauhán kingdom of the Jullundur Doáb.
A place in the Bár where there is a celebrated graveyard. People with sick cattle tie
thom up there at night, and Shaikh Sábú comes out of his grave in the form of a tiger and
oats one of the cattle : then the rest get well,



302
The Rájput character.
The poet appears to have anticipated some of the errors of modern
scholarship in makivg the earlier kings of Delhi Pathans. They were
in reality Turks, and the Chauháns came before, not after, the
Ghorian Sultáns.
But whatever the facts of their history may be Ibbetson's description
of them still merits quotation. As he wrote : « The Rajputs of the
Punjab are fine brave men, and retain the feudal instinct more strongly
developed than perhaps any other non-menial caste, the tribal heads
wielding extraordinary authority. They are very tenacious of the
integrity of their communal property in the village lands, seldom
admitting strangers to share it with them. Pride of blood is their
strongest characteristic, for pride of blood is the very essence of
their Rájputhood. They are lazy, poor husbandmen and much prefer
pastoral to agricultural pursuits, looking upon all manual labour as
derogatory and upon the actual operation of ploughing as degrading;
and it is only the poorest class of Rájput who will himself follow the
plough. They are, in most parts of the Punjab plains, cattle-stealers
by ancestral profession but they exercise their calling in a gentlemanly
way, and there is certainly honour among Rájput thieves."
** Dr. J. Hutchison of Chamba in a paper on the history of the Punjab Hill States
writes regarding the family. surnames of the Rájputs of the Himalayan area that each clan
has numerous sub-divisions which bear distinctive als or surnames in addition to the
general clan-name. Thus the Katoch has 4 great sub-divisions, Jaswal, Goloria, Dadwal
and Sibáia, in addition to its generic appellation, and each of these comprises several als, so
that the Katoch have in all 24 als or so. The Jamwal has 4 main sub-divisions, Jasrotia,
Mankotia, Sámbiál and Lakhanpuria, each with its separate als : in addition the Jamwal
clan has 24 als. The Pathanias have similarly 22 recognised sub-divisions, the Balaurias
12, the Chambiáls 12, and so on. The number of als is a pretty sure indication of the
antiquity of the clan.



803
APPENDIX I.
The following table of the Rajputs of the Hill Rajputs is taken from
Bingley's Dogras, but its sources are not indicated :-
1.- JULLUNDUB CIRCLE.
Ránás or superior class Rájputs of the 2nd grade-
Laddu (Luddu). Chandleh.
Bhanot (Banot). Maile.
Dodh.
Bhabauria.
Datiárach.
Indauria.
Manhás.
Jariál.*
Habrol,
Mankotia
Ghorewaha.
Sonkla.
Ranaut.
The Sonkla and Mánkotia clans are sometimes included among Miáns.
Inferior class Rajputs of the 2nd grade-
Taunia (Taoni).
Sandhwal.
Changra.
Bangotra.
Ohauhan.
Channauria
Guhaina.
Bagsotra.
Deb.
Bihál.
Malautar.
Gomra.
Raghubansi.
Kopahtia.
Bhandari,
Baniál.
Jasial.
Dasoteh.
Nanglo.
Dhatwal.
Datiál.
Samkria.
Anotreb.
Tapriál.
Padhiár-Takhi.
Pahria.
Jaggi,
Dhuriál.
Harchand.
Khanaur.
Kharwál.
Ranaut.
Bariába.
Gori.
Suriál.
Bårliál.
Pathiál.
Sonkla.
Nariál.
Kanthwał.
Garl.
of the above, the Chauhan, Changra, Malautar, and Ranaut clans are
by some classified as Ránás. The exact position of the rest is hard
to define. The Officer Commanding the 2nd Sikhs describes them all
as “ Ráthis, pure and simple.” The following subsidiary list of Raná
clans is furnished by the same authority :
Handoria.
Samauria.
Gumne.
Bhurio.
Udriál.
Patiárach.
Kaniárach.
Manbas.
II.-JAMMU OR DOGAR CIROLE.
Superior class Rájputs of the 2nd grade-
Ohibh.
Charak.
Langeh.
Bhau.
Salabria
Sonkla.
Inferior class Rájputs of the 2nd grade-
Ambaraiyeh.
Rukhwal.
Raghubansi.
Bijial.
Anotreh.
Jaggi.
Jariál.
Bagal.
Chaudri-Andotra,
Sansial.
Harchand.
Karár.Khatri,
Bhatti.
* Jariál is the al of old ruling family of Rajauri, as Mangrál or Mughrál is that of Pánch.



804
APPENDIX II.
The following Rájput pedigreo is printed as a curiosity. Its courageous compilor's object
appears to be to dovetail into it every name famous in Punjab legend.
A Ráj put pedigree table given by a Jágá Bhát or genealogist of the Rajputs in Kapurthala.
BAWA ADAM
Kabir.
Kap.
Kali.
Saraj.
Páp.
Garpal.
Kaul.
Narais.
Jadu.
Bhatti.
Gaj.
sut.
Kiha.
Tuman.
R4j& Salºán (gót Pawar).
Sankh.
Anb
(issue-
less).
Raja
Rasálu
(0.8. p.)
King
10.& p.)
Puran
Bhagat
(a cele
brated
bermit)
Jausar.
Pachi RÁi Dod Tambát Tehan
(0.5, p.) (descend. (descend- (0.8, p.)
ants in ants are
Jammu). the Jioni
Rájputs).
Manbar.
Mann.
sahil.
***
Jondhar.
Achal.
Jagpal.
Dhom.
Chhn.
Chauhan.
Manj.
Bhatti. Rangi Wirsi Malsi
Jirsi
On (descendants (descendants (descendants (descendan.
at Ranyán at Athur, at Jalalabád).' found at
Parm Rath. in H alwán,
Kot Isa
Bhini Ludhiana). Ghalib, etc.).
Kbán).
Bharu Pál Such Pál
Nibal
(at Ahmadpur). (in tahsil (in tahsil
Sultanpur, Sultanpur,
Kapúrthala). Kapurthala).
Guryal Digál
(descendants
Singh Rái. at Dogalpur
in Amritsar).
Pathra.
Jasrái.
Hanspál.
Rai Purab.



305
Rajwá— Ramána.
RÁi Parab.
Makhan Paul.
Harpal.
Nathu.
Bahan Bad Pal. Natikha. Násir. Muhammad. Ahmad. Paroj. Sikandar. Baju. Hakeen
Rai Randeer.
Dalia.
Pándú.
Fata.
| Rại Nanak Chand Jaspaul. Urdin,
(the first to settle in the
Punjab and embrace Islán).
Budha.
Rối Ghoka.
Saroop (in tahsil Abul Khair
Sultanpur), (in Fatu Dinga).
Shát, Daúd. Mangút. Rải 'Abdullah, Malik ShahRái Brahm Rải Rám Deo,
whose descendants
Khán. whose descendants
are found in
are found in
several villages.
numerous villages.
RAJWA, a class of Játs: ?=Rajoa. Panjabi Dicty., p. 949.
RAJWÁNA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán..
Rak, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
RAKAYá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
RÁKSHA8, à sept of second grade Kanets found in Rírang, a village of the
Inner Tukpa pargana in Kanáwar. Cf. Sanskr. rákshasa, a demon,
and see Mashán.
Rakwál, a Rájput tribe claiming descent from Rájá Rám Chandar through
its eponym whose descendants founded two villages in Siálkoç tahsil
under Rájá Abta Deo of Jammu.
RAMAIGA, a wanderer, fr. ramná, to wander (cf. ramta, peripatetic,' a fagir).
The Ramaiga of the eastern Punjab appears to correspond exactly with
the Bhátra and to be the same person under a different name, Ramaiga
being used in Dehli and Hissár, Bhátra in Lahore and Rawalpindi, and
both in Ambála. But various accounts of them are given. Some
desuribe them as shepherds, others as faqirs, who beg and pierce their
ears and poses, and are Juláhás by origin. Some again say they are
Khatík, who dye leather, others that they are a class of Dakauts who
have taken to karewa, while in Karnál they claim descent from Mádho
Bhat and go about boring other peoples' ears and noges. They are
also pedlars, and some go so far as to confuse them with the Ráinjania
or prostitute class, saying they came originally from Rájputána.
Rawan, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Rámán, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar, .
RAMÁNA, & Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,



306
Rámanandi-Ramdasi.
RÁMANANDI,* a follower of Rámanand, whose four disciples founded as
many sub-sects, each divided into two classes, Nágas who are purely
ascetic, practising seclusion, and Samayogis who marry and lead
domestic lives. Both may eat together. Mostly Sudras, some of the
sect wear janeo and style themselves Gaur Brahmans. All details of
the sect and its founder are kept a profound secret.t
RÁMANOJI, a follower of Rámanuj, a Swámi who flourished in the 11th
century A. D. His followers believe that Vishnu is the supreme Being.
Their sectarial marks vary. On the forehead they have two vertical
streaks of gopichandan, a calcareous clay, and inside them is a vertical
red streak of turmeric and lime. The white streaks are connected over
the nose by a transverse streak which admits of several varieties. The
usual marks on the forehead denote that body, tongue and mind
should be kept under subjection. On the breast and upper arms
Rámavujis paint white patches (to represent the shell, quoit, club and
lotus of Vishnu) and in these they enclose red streaks to represent his
consort or energy Lakshmi.
RAMBA, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Rámpásí, Rái- or Ráodásí. These terms are loosely used with several
different meanings. Io its widest sense Ramdásí means a follower of
Gurú Rám Dás, or indeed of any other Gurú; but it is more usually
applied to a Chamár or juláhá who has taken the pahul. It is
generally explained that this Gurú first admitted Chamárs into the
Sikh community, but this theory is untenable, and the name was pro-
bably adopted because it closely resembled Raodás, Rái- or Ravdás, a
famous bhagat of the Chamár caste.
“Bhagat Ravdás, Raidás or Rahdás, a saint of the Chamár (aste,"
writes Mr. Maclagan, “was, according to some accounts, a disciple of
Rámánand; according to others he lived in the time of Akbar. He is
said to hare been born at Benares, and his followers are men of low
caste, mainly Chamárs. The Ceusus gives us no idea of the numbers of
the followers of Ravdás, because there are Rámdási or Rámdási Chamárs, as
well as Ravdásí or Raidásí Chamárs, and the two have become hopelessly
mixed in the returns. Ibbetson distinguishes the two sects of Chamárs
as follows: the Rámdási, he says, are true Sikhs, and take the pahul;
the Ravdásís are not Sikhs, or, if Sikhs, are only Nánakpanthis, and do
not take the pahul. Among the people themselves the two terms are
by no means clearly distinguished. For instance, not a few persons
termed themselves at the Census as followers of Bhagat Ramdás," Mr.
Fagan wrote: “ As far as the Hissár district is concerned, the confu-
sion is, I think, an actual fact, the Hindu Chamárs are really Rabdásis,
being so called after the Bhagat Kahdás. The name appears to have
been corrupted into Rámdási, probably froin confusion with the name
of the Sikli Guru Rámdás. The Sikh Chamárs are also Rámdásis, but
in their case the name may imply a connection with the Gurú Rámdás,
but my own impression is that it is a name which they had before their
* He is said to have had four disciples yet the names of ten are given.
+ Macauliffe: Sikh Religion : VI, pp. 100, 105. Ramanuji's Sectarial Marks, p. 99.
pi The stories of the Bhakta Malá regarding him are given in Wilson's Sketch of the
Hindu Sects,



Rámdásia-Raná.
307
conversion to Sikhism by corruption from Rakdási or Raidási, and the
fact that there are Ráidási Sikhs as well as Rámdási Sikhs corroborates
this theory to some extent. On the other hand, it may be that the
Hindu Chamárs after conversion changed the name of their sect from
Ráidási to Rámdási in order to claim some convection with Rámdás, one
of the leaders of their newly adopted faith.”
The fact that the Raídásís, like the followers of Kabir or Nándeo,
must have held views very similar to those inculcated by Nának,
accounts doubtless for part of the confusion. Of the teachings of
Ravdás little is known, except that he believed in the unity of God and
forbade the worship of idols. He is said to have compiled certain books
which are held in reverence, and he is quoted in the Adi.Granth. His
followers pay him worship by repeating his name as they count their
beads. The Satnámis of the Central Provinces are an offshoot of the
Ráidásí Chamárs.
Rámpásia.- According to Ibbetson in tlie north and centre of the Eastern
Plains a very considerable number of Chamárs have embraced the Sikh
religion. These men are called Kámdásia after Gurú Rám Dás, though
what connection they have with him I have been unable to discover.
Perhaps he was the first Gurú to admit Chamárs to the religion. Many,
perhaps most, of the Rámdási Chamárs have abandoned leather-work
for the loom; they do not eat carrion, and they occupy a much higher
position than the Hindu Chamárs, though they are not admitted to
religious equality by the other Sikhs. The Rámdási are often confused
with the Raidási or Rabdási Chamárs. The former are true Sikhs, and
take the pahul. The latter are Hindus, or if Sikls, only Nánakpanthi
Sikhs and do not take the pahul; and are followers of Bhagat Rav
Dás or Rab Dis, himself a Chamár. They are apparently as true
Hindus as any Chamárs can be, and are wrongly called Sikhs by con-
fusion with the Rámdásias.
RÁMGARHIA, the third of the Sikh misls or confederacies, which was recruited
from Tokhas or Bharais (carpenters) and Játs. It derives its naine
from Rámgarh, a village near Amritsar.
RAMMALI. In Arabic ramal means 'sand.' There is a species of divination
in the East called the science of sand' Jould pds (Ilm-ul rammal).
J. R. A. S., XIII, p. 272. Among the Baloch 'there are professional
augurs called rammali, but they appear to divine from the lines on the
shoulder-blade' of a newly killed goat. Balochi, hardast, Jatki, binjri.
P. N. Q., II, § 148. Cf. Ráwal.
RÁM RÁIÁ.--A Sikh sect wbich oves its origin to Rám. Rai, the eldest son of
Har Rai, the seventh Gurú, to whom they adhered when Tegh Bahadur
became Gurú. They have a considerable establishment near Hardwar,
Rámye, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
RÁN, a Ját (agricultural) clan, found in tahsil Multán, where it settled from
Delhi in Mughal times, and in Sháhpur.
Ráná=rájánaka=almost a king : the title borne by the petty rulers of
the Western Himalaya iu ancient times, now a caste-name for their
descendants. A superior class of Rájputs.



308
The Ránas or Thákurs.
Among the most interesting families in the Punjab Hills are the
Ránás and Țhákurs, whose ancestors ruled the country as petty chiefs
previous to the advent of the Rájás. At the present time few of them
retain any influence, most of them having been reduced to the position
of common farmers, but the traditions and folklore of the people leave
no doubt that in former times their ancestors held independent sway
over a large part of the Western Hills. In the slab inscriptions and
copper plates they are usually indicated by the name rájánaka, and
referring to the origin of this word Dr. Vogel says :-
" This word is not found in the classical literature of India and seems, therefore, to bo
a Sanskritized rather than a true Sanskrit word. Dr. Grierson has suggested a connection
between this word and the Prákrit title rájana (i.e., rájanna = Skr. rájanya) which occurs
on coins. lo me it seems more probable that the word rúná is derived directly from
rájan. Perhaps it is the oblique case of this word transferred to the nominative. In any
case there can be little doubt that the word corresponds with the modern ráná, used either
as the title of a petty chief or as a caste-name. In the former meaning it is synonymous
with Sanskrit sámanta and thákura. Ia one of our inscriptions (No. 32) we find the terms
rájánaka and sámanto applied to the same person. The word thakkura occurs in the form
ļ hakura in the Markula image inscription (No. 48). It is not found elsewhere in the
Chemba epigraphs, but in the Rájátarangíní it is used in exactly the same sense as
rájánaka, to denote a feudal chieftain. I may add that nowadays the titles ráná and thákur
are employed promiscuously."*
It is probable, however, that in former times, as at the present day,
the two names implied a difference of caste, the ránás being of the
warrior caste and the thúkurs of the Thákur or Ráthi caste. The
Ránás seem to have been more numerous in some parts of the hills
and the Thákurs in others. In Chamba, Bhadrawah, Pádar and
Pángi, for example, almost all the old rulers appear to have been
ránás. In the middle Chandrabhága Valley, on the other hand, the
name rána is little known, and the ancient rulers, who are several
times referred to in the Rájatarangíní, bore the title of thákur. In
Kulu and Láhul also the title thákur was most common though there
were also ránás in both of these tracts. In the outer hills, however, the
ránás seem to have been numerous and a good many Ráná families are
still to be found in Kángra, where their ancestors held rule in former
times. Mr. Barnes makes the following remarks regarding them :-
“ Another class of Rajputs who enjoy great distinction in the hills
are the descendants of anciert petty chiefs or ránás, whose title and
tenuie is said to bave preceded that of the Rájás tliemselves. These
petty chiefs have long since been dispossessed and their holdings
absorbed in the larger principalities, still the name of ráná is retained
and their alliance is eagerly desired by the Miáns. The principal
fanuilies are those of Chari, Giro, Kanhiyári, Patbiár, Habrol, Gumbar
and Diadwal.
Till recently the rajánaka of the Punjab Hills were known exclu.
sively from the Rájatarangini or History of Kashmir, and i he Baijnath
eulogies. Speaking of the latter, Dr. Vogel says :-" The latter acquaint
us with a baronial bonse which ruled at Kíragráma, the modern
Baijnáth, for eight generations and owned allegiance to the rájas of
Trigarta (Kángļa). Their importance may be estimated from the fact
that the mother of Lakshmana Chandra, the Rává of the time, was
* Antiquities of Chamba (Vol. I, p. 110) : by Dr. J. Ph. Vogel, Ph.D., Superintendent,
Archæological Survey of India.



The Rána chivalry.
309
& daaghter of Hardaya Chandra of Trigarta. The inscription, how-
ever, does not say whether her mother was a rání. It is certainly
opposed to prevailing usage that the head of the illustrious house of
Trigarta sbonld give a daughter in marriage to one of his vassals.
How punctilious the Katoches were in matrimonial matters, even in the
expiring days of their rule, is shown by the example of Anirudh Chand,
the last ruling chief of Kángſa, who, rather than acquiesce in a
matrimonial alliance which he considered below the dignity of his
house, abandoned his state and everything."*
Referring to the abovenamed Ráná the Baijnath eulogy says:
“ Even now exist such wonderful pen, filled with devotion to Ishvara,
like that store of marvellous virtue, the Rajánaka named Lakshmana
Chandra, who after performing a pilgrimage to Kedára that cleanses
from old sin, made even this vow, 'Henceforth shall all wives of others
be sisters to me. What wonder is it that in battle he was secure from
the assaults of warriors of irresistible bravery, since he, a Cupid at the
head of the bowmen, was not to be subdued even by tbat (deity). At
present rulers, whose commands are disregarded by their opponents,
because they deem them to be of small prowess, think the sovereignty
over a town as yielding its legitimate result only by the rape of the
wives of its inhabitants. Fresh youth, beautiful form, liberality,
sovereignty over a town, many flatterers, all these are his; if never-
theless his heart avoids the wives of others, what austerity is difficult
to perform after that?” Buhler rightly remarks that "the picture
of the morals of the time which these verses unfold is certainly not a
flattering one."
To the Ránás we are indebted for most of the beautifully carved
cisterns and slab inscriptions so common in Chamba and other parts
of the Hills, a full account of which will be found in the Antiquities of
Chamba, Vol. I. These inscriptions convey to us a more favourable
impression of the ancient chiefs. Referring to them Dr. Vogel sayst:--
"No doubt, like the knights of mediæval Europe, they regarded love and war as the
great aims of life. But their love was often the devotion of the husband, and their warlike
spirit was not rarely displayed in loyal service to their liege-lord. Of the conjugal devo.
tion of these warlike barons we have ample proof in these quaint fountain slabs, which
they set up for the sake of the future bliss of their deceased wives. And we find it ex-
pressed even more clearly in the solemn Sanskrit of those eulogies where, hidden under the
weight of rhetorical ornament, we still feel the pulsations of true love. Would it be just
to cast on the hero of the Saráhan eulogy, the reproach that his love for the beauteous
Somaprabha was inspired merely by her fair form, the beauty of which is sung in such
glowing measures, in that love song carved in stone ? Did he not prove its sincerity when,
to establish a firm friendship between her and the mountain-born goddess (Párvati), he
built a temple to the moon-crowned Shiva.
In the half obliterated lires of the Mul-kihár stone we still read of the tears shed by
the chieftain of that place and his children, when 'hostile fate separated her, his most
beloved, seated on his lap, the delight of his eyes and praised by all mankind, from her
husband, even as the passing of the parvan separates the Moon sickle from the hot.rayed
Sun.
The no less sadly damaged eulogy of Devikothi speaks of yet another love, that of a
noble lady who, at her husband's death being ready to follow him on the pyre, was kept
back by her two sons, and who henceforth, whilst by rigid vows of constant fasts she
reduced her body to meagreness, brought ip her sons and increased her charity. her
compassion for the poor and her devotion to Krishna. And at overy step conceivinó tha
• Loc. cit.
† Op. cit , pp. 111.2.



310
The Rána ascendancy.
world of the living to be unstable, like the crescent reflected in a garland of waves, restless
and trembling with the fleeting breeze, she caused a cistern to be made for the sake of the
bliss of ber lord.
I know of no Indian inscriptions in which true human sentiment finds so eloquent an
expression as in those two, alas ! irreparably mutilated fountain slabs; nor would it be
easy to point to another group of epigraphical records in which the feminine element is so
prominent as in those of Chamba."
In their relations with one another the Ránás appear in a much less
favourable light. By each of them his next neighbours seem to have
been regarded as natural enemies, with whom the only possible re-
lationship was one of mortal feud. When not opposing a common foe
they were engaged in oppressing and despoiling one another, and in
the memory of the hillmen they are associated only with dissension and
strife. Numerous incidents of those stirring times have been handed
down by local tradition, and are treasured in the folklore of the people.
One of them is worth recording. In Loh-Tikri there resided two ránás
at the veighbouring villages of Báhnota and Siya, who were at con-
tinual feud with each other. At length the less powerful, being weary
of the harassing treatment to which he was subjected, entered into a
compact with a third ráná, who promised to come to his help on
hearing the alarm-horn. Soon afterwards the signal was given and
the new ally hastened to the spot to find that the horn had been
sounded only to test his fidelity. The result was that when next the
alarm was heard, at a time of real need, it was disregarded, and the
weaker rání bad to submit to any humiliation bis powerful neighbour
chose to inflict on bim.
The period during which the Ránás and Thákurs ruled in the hills
is spoken of as the 'Thákuri'or • Thákurain,'* and in Chamba the
name' Ranhui' is sometimes heard. This Țhákurain rule seems to
have been of ancient origin, but when it began and how long it lasted
are questions to which no satisfactory answers can be given. It
probably dated from a very remote antiquity; and it continued in
force till a much later period in some parts of the hills
than in others. Sir J. B. Lyall points out that the traditions relating
to the Thákurain are much older in Kángļa than in Kulu, owing probably
to the fact that the Ránás were subjected at a much earlier period in the
former than in the latter. In Kulu they continued to maintain a
semi-independent existence till the reign of Rája Bahadur Singh, A. D.
1559, by whom most of them were finally subdued. In the upper Rávi
Valley they lost their independence at a very early period, for we have
the record of a feudatory chief, named Ashádha of Guņ, as early as the
reion of Meru Varma of Chambel (A. D. 680—700) whose samanta or
vassal be styles himself. In the lower Rávi Valley and Pángi they were
probably independent down to the tenth or eleventh century when they
hecame subject to Chamba. The Thákurs of Láhul were in ancient
times subject to Tibet or Ladákb, but in the tenth or eleventh century
those of the upper Chandrabhága Valley came under the control of
Chamba. In Padar the Ránás ruled the country till the seventeenth
century when they were displaced by Rája Chatar Singh of Chamba,
A, D. 1664-90, but it is probable that, from the twelfth century,
* Thákurai also means a' barony.'



ough the traditionele elheir state this daya Family
The Rána ascendancy.
311
they were dependent on Chamba. The Thákurs of the middle Chand.
rabhága Valley retained their independence till a date later than
the tenth century when the Kashtwar State was founded : while the
Ránás of Bhadrawáh seem to have been in power down to the sixteenth
century.
Indeed, all through the hills traces are still to be found of the old
order of things, and local tradition can often point to the sites of the
Ránás' forts, or recall stories of their exploits, and even define the
boundaries of their territories. In the Chamba State there are several
cases in which their descendants retain possession to this day of the
whole, or a part of the old family domain, and still bear the old family
title ; while many more wbə have sunk to the position of common
cultivators are spoken of, and addressed as ráná. In the Kulu Settle-
ment Report, Sir J. B. Lyall says: “Many of the existing kothís and
tappas are said to have possessed their present limits from the day when
each of them formed the domain of a Thákur." The same is probably
true as regards some of the parganas of Chamba State, though, judging
from common tradition, the country would seem to have been more
minutely subdivided than was the case in Kulú. In former times,
however, these parganas were more numerous than at present, and may
then have represented, to a greater extent than they do now, the
ancient limits of the old ranhus. Some of the State kothis are said to
stand on the very sites formerly occupied by the Ránás' forts, and there
is hardly a locality where the villagers cannot recail the place of residence
of the local ráná, and can often point out the very site on which his
house or fort formerly stood. In some cas-8 in Chamba as et Mulkihár
and Devi Kothi, the ruins are still visible, and in others, as at Kuthi.
ranhu, Sutker and Deol, the ancient buildings are, or till recently were
in actual use.
The baronies owned by these petty chiefs were called ranhu, and
were always of small extent often comprising only a few villages.
As regards their relation to the more powerful states in their vicinity,
Sir J. B. Lyall suggests tbat the small states of the Thákurain period
can seldom have been entirely independent. He says: “ Without a
lord paramount, and with no bond of confederacy, such diminutive
states could never have existed side by side for any length of tiine. It
is pretty certain, therefore, that with short intervals of complete iu-
dependence in periods of confusion, they must have been more or less
subject and tributary to some superior power." That in some parts of
the hills the Ránás acknowledged the supremacy of a paramount
power seems probable, but that in others, especially in the olden time
they were free and independent rulers is fully borne out by local tradi-
tion, and the negative evidence of some of the slab inscriptions.
The earliest known inscription in which the title rájánaka occurs is
on the base of a stone Devi image at Svaim in the Himgari pargana
of Chamba, and it records that the image was made by the order of
Rájánaka Bhogata, son of Somata, born in the district of Kishkindha.
It is not dated, but judging from the characters it must belong to the
eighth or ninth century. Neither in this inscription nor in that of
Saráhan of the tenth century, is any mention made of an overlord, from



312
Origins of the Ránas.
which we may conclude that these ránás were independent rulers. On
the other hand, the ránás of Churáh and Pángi, in the twelfth century,
dated their inscriptions in the regnal year of the ruling Rájá. For
several centuries after their subjection the Ránás continued to rank as
feudal barons under the ruling chiefs, and the copper-plates of the
tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries clearly prove that they then held
a prominent position in the Strte. They are mentioned immediately
after the Rájá in the order of precedence, and at the head of all the
State officials. In the reign of Rájá Soma Varma of Chamba (A. D.
1060-80) two Ránás-Ribila and Kahila by name-filled, respectively,
the important offices of Prime Minister and Lord Chancellor. On the
fountain slabs the Ránás are rudely depicted as knights on horseback,
armed with sword and shield, and as feudal barons each of them had
his own retainers with whom he accompanied his lord-superior, the
Rájá, ou military expeditions. In this relationship we see a close
analogy to the feudal system of mediæval Europe.
The title rájánaka seems originally to have been held only by the
ancient petty chiefs, but in later times the Rájás of Kashmir, Chamba,
and probably other States, were in the habit of conferring it on some
of their officers, as a personal distinction for special services. The title
was probably given along with a jágír or grant of land.
Several instances are found in the Rájátarangíní in which the title
was so conferred, and Dr. Stein in referring to them says :-
“The title Rájánaka, meaning literally almost a king,' used to be given for services
rendered to the king. The title has survived in the form Rázdán as a family name of
very frequent occurrence among the Brahmans of Kashmír. As the designation of certain
high officers (Muhammadans) the term Rájánaka is often used by Shrivara and in the fourth
Chronicle. The title was also known in Trigarta or Kángra.”
Referring to the same subject Dr. Vogel says :--It appears from
the Rájátarangíní that in Kashmir the title rújánaka came to be given
to high officials as a purely honorary distinction. Thus we read that
Queen Didda (A. D. 980-1003) called her favourite, Harawáhana, into
the council of ministers and conferred on him the title of rájánaka.
This practice apparently had become so common that in Kalhana's days
the term was regarded as almost synonymous with “minister." This
is evident from the following passage in which the chronicler says of
King Parvagupta :-"Displaying a conduct in which the royal dignity
was combined with the functions of a minister, he created the mingled
impression of Rájá and Rájánaka."-Antiquities of Chamba, Vol. I,
p. 114.
“The old feudatory ránás of the Punjab Hills belonged naturally to
the warrior caste. But the high officials on whom the honorary title
of rájánaka was conferred were often Brahmans, and thus the word has
survived in Kashmir in the form rázdán as a Brahmanical family name."
... It is curious that in the later Kashmir chronicles the same title
is used to designate Muhammadan officers of rank. This accounts for
the use of the word Rán in Kashmir as a Muhammadan krám name,
which, as Dr. Stein observes, corresponds exactly to rázdán as a family
name of Brahmaps."--Ibid , p. 115.
Un a slab inscription lately found in Chamba a specific instance is
given in which the title of Rájánaka was conforred by Rájá Lalita Varma
3



The Ránas and Rájas.
313
a personal dist prevailed of the thiably from a mit may be casion and in
cient ineers of the escended to out the presents under conferred
Responstige of the land slam
(A. D. 1143-70) on a landholder, named Naga-pála, who lived near
Debri Kothi in Churáh. This use of the title was probably in vogue
from the time of the Rájput conquest, and a tradition exists in the
families of three of the Ránás in the upper Rávi Valley_Uláns, Gurola,
and Suai--that their common ancestor came back from Kúlu with
Rájá Moshan Varma (A. D. 820-40), when he recovered his territory
from the Kira invaders (vide page 72 of Chamba Gazetteer), and received
his title along with a jágir for services rendered on that occasion and in
the subsequent conquest of the Rávi Valley. It may be noted that
during Mughal rule, and probably from a much earlier period, an
analogous use prevailed of the title ' Rájá,' which was often conferred as
a personal distinction and this ase still exists under British rule.
Of the Ránás in the Chamba State at the present time it is impossible
to say how many are descended from titular ránás and how many from
the early rulers of the hills, but many of them are unquestionably of
ancient lineage. Few now bold jágirs or exercise any authority,
most of them being common farmers, but it is probable that in almost
every instance their holdings are a portion of the old family lands.
The references to the Ránás on the older plates and slab inscriptions
of Chamba imply that up till the middle of the twelfth century they
had lost nothing of their former prestige. Till then, indeed, it seems
to have been the policy of the Rájás to retain their allegiance by giv.
ing them high positions at the Court and in the administration. After
this a break occurs in the continuity of our records and when the
narrative is resumed by the later plates, beginning with that of Rájá
Vairási Varma (A. D. 1330), all references to the Ránás have ceased.
There is reason to believe that from this period they bagau to decline
in influence, and to lapse into the condition of obscurity in which we
now find whem. The question arises as to the causes which brought
about their downfall, and the bistory of a similar class of feudalba vops
in Kashmír may perhaps suggest an answer. From the Rájátarangini
we learn that in the beginning of the twelfth century the Dámaras who
were the great land holders in Kashmír, and held the same social and
political position as the Ránás and Thákurs in Chamba-had acquired,
doring a long succession of weak reigns, -80 much power as to have
become a menace to the ruling house. Ring Harsha (A, D, 1089-1101),
therefore, determined on their destruction, and many of them were
accordingly massacred. This procedure, however, entirely failed of its
object and only resulted in a successful revolt which cost Harsha his
throne and his life. The succeeding reigns furnish a record of almost
continuous strife between the central authorities and the Dámaras or
between the various factions of the Dámaras themselves.
Thore is hardly a State in the hills which does not pogsegg traditions
of a similar conflict between the feudatory chiefs and their liege-lords
the Rájás ; forcibly reminding us of the long struggle of the monarch,
of mediæval Europe with their powerful barons,
For a long period after their subjection by the Rájás, the Ránas
seem to bave clung to the hope of regaining their independence and
in almost every one of the Hill States an attempt was made by them
to drive out their new masters. In Kashtwár such an attempt took
place in the beginning of the 13th century, when the Rájá was com-



814
The Ránas and Rájas.
pelled to flee from his capital and seek an asylum in the mountains ;
where he lived with a few followers for more than a year, before he
was able to recover possession of the State. In Bhadrawáh also
tradition tells of a powerful combination against the ruling chief as
late as the sixteenth century, and a decisive battle on the Chaugan
within the town, in which the Ránás were defeated. From the Kulu
chronicle we learn that the strife between the Rájás and their feudal
vassals went on for centuries, till at last thè Thákurs were finally
subjected by Rajá Babádur Singh (A. D). 1559).
Obscure traditions of a similar state of things exist in Chamba and
it seems probable that there too the Ránás were a source of danger,
and safety was assured by their complete subjection. That some of
them were almost independent of the central authority may be con-
jectured from the wording of some of the slab inscriptions; and local
tradition has handed down inany interesting and significant incidents
which confirm this conjecture. One of these is worth recording. Be-
fore the conquest of the lower Rávi Valley by Rájá Sahila Varma of
Brabmapura the country in proximity to the present capital was ruled
by a Ráná who had his fort on the Bannu Hili overlooking the town,
and separated from it by the Sál stream. From this Ráná or one of
his successors tribute was demanded by the uew rulers, and this de-
mand was persistently refused. The Ráná in question may possibly
be identical with a Ráná Kihila, whose name, as also that of his Ráni,
Balha, has been banded down by tradition. On being summoned to
the presence of the Rájá the Ráná is said to have laid aside his insolent
demeanour and meekly promised compliance with the royal demand ;
but on returning to the other side of the stream, he became as obstinate
as ever. After consultation the conclusion was come to, in explanation
of this strange conduct, that it was due to the infinence of the soil. To
test this a quantity of earth was procured from Bannu Hill, and spread
on the floor of the audience chamber, with a carpet over it, and the
Ráná was again invited to an interview. On arrival be took his seat
on the carpet as usual. But when in the course of conversation re-
ference was made to the matter of tribute he sprang to his feet, drew
his sword, and demanded to know who had a right to ask tribute of
bim. The result doubtless was his expulsion, or removal to another
place wbere the soil did not exert this baneful influence. A similar
tradition is found in Kulu, and other parts of the hills, and is sigpi.
ficant of the state of tension wbich seems to have existed between the
various chiefs and their over-lords. That this tension resulted in
open strife, and the eomplete subjection of the Rádás, seems only too
probable, and to this we may attribute the fact that at the prosent
time so many of them bave nothing but their title to prove their
ancient lineage and the former importance of their families.
The title ráná has now become a caste-name in Chamba and Kangra
and at the last census in Cbamba 94 males and 84 females were returned
under this name. The exact number of existing Rána families in Chamba
State is not known, but they probably number not less than 20 or 30.
As a rule they marry among themselves or with guod Rájput families,
but most of those who have been reduced to the position of common
agriculturists marry in their own caste or with Thákurs or Ráthis.



Ráná families.
315
The most important Rána family in Chamba is that of Triloknath
in Cbamba-Láhul, which has held a portion of the Chandrabhaga
Valley from time immemorial. The family tradition is that their
ancestor came from Jammu, and settled in Tundah, afterwards crossing
the Pángi Range to Trilokpáth before the idol of that name was set
up. The Ráná is a jágírdár and bis son is addressed as “Tíka.”
One of his ancestors was called Hamír Bardhain, and his deeds
are sung in the local dialoct. He is reported to have defeated a
Kulu Raja who tried to carry off the idol of Triloknáth and was
subsequently invited to a feast and murdered after having laid aside
his armour. Though professedly a Hindu the Ráná acts as manager
of the Triloknáth shrine and appoints the láma in attendance. At the
annual mela connected with the shrine, on the last day of Sáwan, he
takes the leading part in the proceedings. His jágír includes the
villages of Tunde, Kisori, Binsa, Shokoli, Salgraon and part of Shor
and Purthi in Pángí, also the whole of the Miyár Nálá.
The Ránás next in importance reside at Ulánsa, Gurola and Suai, in
Brahmaur, on the left bank of the Rávi, near its junction with the
Budhal. According to tradition these three baronies were originally
one fief, granted by Rájá Mushan Varma to the Ráná of Ulánsá--the
common ancestor of the three families. The areas of their ranhus are
as follows :-Ulánsa, 376 acres ; Gurola, 274 acres ; Suai, 235 acres.
The present Ráná of Gurola is an old man of 70 and has no heir to
succeed him. Till recently these Ránás were under obligation to
render military service, and the ancestor of the Ulánsa Rána is said
to have fallen at Nerti with Raj Singh. This obligation was commuted
into a money payment by Rájá Shám Singh, of Rs. 100 annually
in the case of Ulánsa, and Rs. 70 for Suai, The Ráná of Gurola is
exempt from payment. There is also a Ráná at Sámra in the Rávi
Valley, whose ancestor is said to have come from Kaniyára in Rihlu,
He too is a jágírdár. His ancestors were hereditary keepers of the
Prithvijor fort, having been appointed probably by Rájá Prithvi Singh.
Another Ráná holds a small jáger at Margráon in Chamba-Láhul.
The agricultural Ránás in Chamba are found in the parganas of
Kothiranhn, Piura, Rájnagar, Loh-Tikri, Dhund, Tisa, Baira, Sai,
Himgari, Kilár and Sách. They all enjoy exemption from begár or
forced labour, and most of them have the rank of Akkar. One of the
most interesting figures among the Ráná farmers is the old Ráná of
Sálhi in Pángi. Near his house is a huge fountain slub, containing a
long inscription, erected by one of his ancestors, named Rájánaká
Ludrapala, in the reign of Rája Lalita Varma (A. D. 1143-70). When,
some years ago, the stone was thrown down by an avalanche the Ráná
took care to re-erect it as the embodiment of the departed glory of his
house.
All the Rána and Thákur families who are jágírdárs enjoy immunity
from State service, but are under obligation to attend upon the Rája,
whenever ancient custom requires them to do so. On the demise of
any of the Ránás who are jágírdárs his successor bas to come to
Chamba in order to have his title verified ; and a putta is then granted,
with a khilat in the case of the Ráná of Triloknáth. On the accession



816
The Ránás in Kulo
of a Rájá the Ránk of Triluknáth tenders his allegiance in person and
presents as his nazrána a number of bill ponies.
The Rev. A. H. Francke of the Moravian Mission has the following
note on the Ránás of British Láhul :-"In the Tibetan writings I have
met with the word only once, namely in the Tinan Chronicle discovered
by Miss J. E. Duncan in 1907. There the ancestor of the Princes of
Tinan, who came from Leags-mokar (Ice-castle) in Guge, is called Rádá
Pálá. Pála is certainly a Hinduized form of the common Tibetan name
Pál. The family obtained the title of ráná either from the Rája of Kulu
or from Chamba. Popular tradition asserts that at one time the Rájá
of Chamba ruled over a considerable portion of Láhul. Perhaps the
fuuptain slabs of Lábul date from that period. The tradition of Gus
refers to the time when a Ráná dependent on Chamba resided at that
place. It is even said that there existed a copper plate issued by a
Chamba Rájá, which was carried off by the Rájá of Kulu (possibly Bidhi
Singh or Mán Singh) at the conquest of Láhul. The fountain of Gus
is entirely enclosed in ancient stone slabs. There are also two inscrip-
tions which relate tu the Ránás of Gus. Descendants of these Ránás
live at Gus down to the present day, where they form a 'father-and-
brother (pha-spun) hood,' which perhaps corresponds to the caste in
India.”
The folk-lore of Kulu is full of traditions regarding the Ráná and
Thákur families of those secluded valleys which may throw some light
on their origins. The following notes have been collected by Mr.
G. C. L. Howell:-
"The only Rává family in the Kulu Valley is the Nuwáni family at
Aleo on the left bank of the Beas at the foot of the Hamta Pass. They
call themselves Kanet now, but are admittedly descended from a post-
humous son of Jínna Ráná by a concubine who was with child when the
Ráná's ránis performed sati. She was in consequence spared and gave
birth to a son who was subsequently recognised by Rájá Sidh Singh
Badáni* and granted Aleo in jágir. The royal descent of the family
was discovered from the fact that they buried their dend under memorial
stone-a royal privilege. . Until recently they feasted and sacrificed
goats on the death of a Badáni Rájá and probably do so still.
The story of Jínna Ráná is thus told : He had a groom (khásdár)
named 'Muchiáni't, the Dági, whose beard was nine hands long. Rájá
Sidh Singh sommoned him to the Aleo plain and commissioned him to
kill his master, the Ráná. As the Rápá was one day riding to Mandan
Kotf from the rice-lands below Bashist, Muchiáni shot him through the
thigh with an arrow at 300 yards range the place is still marked by
an auram and the Ráná rode at him, but promised to spare his life if he
could bit & maina sitting on a buffalo's back without hurting the beast.
This the Dági did. Then the Raná rode on to Mandan Kot, but at
Baira Kahtu he drank water and died. His horse galloped up to his
stable and neighed, and at the same time Muchiáni walked up the road
druniming a dirge on a sieve.
* All families in Bulu have surnames e g. the Rájás are Badani. The family of the Dagi
who murdered his master is surnamed Muchiádi.
+ The moustachio'd.'
One of bis two forts. The other was at Manáli.



Thákurs in Kulu.
317
This warned the rání who burnt the fort and all her women, includ-
ing Muchiáni's wife. So the Rání became a Jogni and not to be out-
done the Muchiánis made the Dágin, his wife, into a Jogni too-and her
temple is near Burwa. But Sidh Singh rewarded the Muchiánis with
the rice-lands of Kamánu which they still hold, and the family still
flourishes, being the sheep.stealers par excellence of the valley, but they
are still not allowed near the deota. When there is no rain the people
send up the Muchiánis with a cow-skin which they burn near the Kot
and this so disgusts the ghosts that they send rain to get rid of the
nuisance
It was Jinna's own ráni who saved the pregnant concubine and sent
her out of the fort before it was burnt. When he grew up he was
sent to herd buffaloes on the Gaddi Paddar. One day Sidh Singh saw
him and bade him shoot a buffalo which he bad brought to sacrifice to
Hirma Devi at Dungri. This the boy did and then the Rájá found out
who he was and gave him Aleo in jágír.
Bhosal Ráná had a fortified palace at Gada Dheg just below the
modern village of Baragraon which is approximately the site of his
capital, Sangor. His wife was Rúpní, a Suket princess; by her he had
an heir-apparent Tika Ghungru and a daughter Dei Ghudari, and his
wazír was a Brahman, Tita Mahta-so he was clearly a ruling prince.
But he was fatally superstitious and when his rání repelled the wazír's
advances, he persuaded the Rána to bury his spouse alive lest the
channel which watered his rice-lands should fail. But the mason em-
ployed to build the living tomb was her dharm-bhar and he so designed
it that she could move about in it. The wazír, however, came to see
his work and finding the ráni still alive tried to seize her hair, but she
crouched down. He then piled stones upon her till she died. But the
mason sent her children to seek aid from their uncle Rup Chand,
apparently a chief in Suket, and he invaded the Ráná's principality,
took him and the wazír prisoner and put the latter to a cruel death.
But the Ráná he would not kill, and so he dressed bim in a homespun
kilt and a necklace of dried cow-dung and pelted him out of his State,
with pieces of the same substanca
In Kulu the Thákur families appear to be of somewhat diverse
origins. Thus the Thákurs of Parsha in Kuthi Nagar came to Kulu
from Kángra as wazárs of Rúpi when it was ruled by Suket, but they
fell out with the Rájá. Rája Hari Singh* made them wazirs of Parsha.
They now intermarry with the Thakurs of Kot in Inner Sarai and with
Dogra Thákurs from Kángra, but they are casual about alliances and
the father of one of them was married to a Ráthit Rajputni, yet his
son calls himself a Thákur and declares that he will only marry a
Thakur's daughter.
The Thákurs of Barogi are descended from Bogi Thakur who was
killed by Sidh Singh. The Rájá also sacked the Barogi fort—but he
gave the family a muáfi.
In Kothi Kais eight or nine Thákur families are found, of these those
surnamed Dallál, Rogial and Kothiáge claim descent from the Karlal
Thákurs, but the others Lániál, Basáni and Chumán (Kashauli) are
* No such Rájá is traceable in the Kulu or Suket dynastic lists,
+ ln Kulu it is always said of a man who has married out of his caste: 'Ráthi hogya,' .
!



318
Ránah-Randháwa.
vague as to their origin. The Thug and Kandąhrui families, however,
are descended from Bogi Thákar. These two families only intermarry
with the Deta Thákurs of Kot in Kot Kothi and a family of Bashahru
Thákurs in Bashahr. They do not wear the janeo, but they will only
eat dál, etc., from the hands of one who does so. Rámpál, a Ráná of
Nagar, conquered all these Thákurs except the Karlal Thakur who
threw in his lot with him and was spared. He had strongholds at
Kothiage, Daul and Rogi-whence the surnames of his descendants.
The Thákurs of Saraj and Rúpi are well off the beaten track and
have retained much more of the old caste spirit and traditions than
those of the Kula valley itself. They have special caste marks, viz. a
single broad band painted horizontally across the forehead, a single dot
on the bridge of the nose, a line (binda) round the inner side of the ear
and a horizontal mark over the Adam's apple. The family at Tang in
Kothi Sainsar is descended from Hul Thakur who lived ten generations
ago. It wears no janeo. It is worn by only one member of the family
at Taliára and he declines to plough. So, tno, in the family at Kateaugi
in Kothi Banogi only one wember wears the janeo, the families at
Dashiar, and of Daliára (in K. Balhan) not wearing it at all. This latter
family appears to be of somewhat recent origin as it is descended from
Háti who conquered Hul Thákur for Rájá Bahadur Singh and com-
manded his troops all through the campaign in Saraj. The Rajá con-
ferred upon him a sásan in perpetuity, with the Hális or ploughmen
settled on the land as serfs.
Other so-called Thákurs in Kulu were clearly merely Tibetan frontier
officers holding the left bank of the Beas. Above Jagatsukh was Piti
Thakur whose kitna or portal and chautara or sitting place are still
pointed out at the west and lower end of the fortified spor above
Bharáru. He drank women's milk, and this caused him to be so un.
popular that Sidh Singh was proclaimed Rájá.
Piti Thákur's temple was the Jamla temple* at Prini-the only one
in which the Spiti people will worship. Its chela always says the god
came from Mahabhotant, Mahá-chín or Pangu Padal Mansarowar.
and when really inspired he is supposed to speak Tibetan.
Under Piti Thákur were the Dirot and Bharám Thákurs who not only
milked women but even performed human sacrifice.
Ránah (History of Sialkot, p. 56), see Ráná.
RANÁWAT, an al or sept of the Bariáh clan of Rajputs. The name appears to
be a patronymic-possibly meaning' son of a Ráná.'
RANDBÁWA.-The Randháwa is a large and widely spread Ját tribe whose
head-quarters appear to be tbe Amritsar and Gurdaspur districts, but
* This temple is a place of sanctuary and in a dum or uprising of the people in Rája Jit
Singh's time (1807-43) the wife of Tulsu Negi, who was the object of the people's batred,
took refuge in it. The leader of the dum, however, violated it by having Tulsa's womenfolk
dragged out of it, and bad harvests in Saráj ensued until Rai Hira Singh with the Chini
deota (Saring rishi or Sikirni) and representatives of every Kothi in Saraj got the curse
removed. This was done 20 years ago. All the descendants of the dumyas and a crowd of
qurs and chelas had to attend to do penance (chidhru) at the temple. Little dolls of grass
and birch bark with false pigtails were made, tied together and chopped to bits, while the
priests loctured the descendants of the offenders.



The Randhawas.
319
who are also found in considerable numbers in Lahore, Jullondur,
Hoshiarpur, and Pațiála. * Their founder Randháwa, a Jádu or Bhatti
Rajpút, lived in Bíkáner some seven centuries ago ; and Kajjal, fifth
in descent from him, migrated to Batála which had some time before
been founded by Rám Deo, another Bhatti. Here the tribe increased in
numbers, possessed itself of a very considerable tract of country, and
rose to some political importance. The history of the Randhawa family
is fully detailed in the Punjab Chiefs.I A few Randhawa return them-
selves also as Bhatti in Gujranwala and as Virk in Ferozepore.
In Gurdaspurs the Randháwas say that Randhawa, a Rájput, aank
to Ját status by marrying Sobág, the daughter of Sanghar, a Mán Ját.
While living in the Málwa they waxed rich and powerful, and their
neighbonirs, Cháhil Játs, became jealous of them, but they gave a
Randhawa boy a girl in marriage and at the wedding feast burnt or
destroyed all the Randháwas save the children and the aged. These
escaped and settled in Amritsar tahsil, but to this day they do not in-
terinarry with the Cháhils. Their old home in the Malwa, Támkot, is
now deserted. They are connected with the Sidhu and Sarai clans
thus: -
Jundar (? Chaundar).
Batera,
Papattar (? Pippar) Walli.
Randhawa.
Sarai.
Yet they can intermarry with both those clans.
Sidhu,
* The Randháwas of Mimsa in tahsil Amrgarh of Pațiála settled there, because when the
tripe was migrating from Támkot the axle of one of their carts broke, and this its owners
held to be an omen that they should settle at that spot. The rest of the tribe went on and
cursed those who remained, predicting that every 12 years they would be compelled to
migrate atresb. The Randháwas of Mimsa, to fulfil this prediction, make a journey with
apart, every 12th year to the spot where the axle broke and worship it: the uncle cutting a
lock of hair from his nephew's head. On their return home, they say, the axle of the cart
always breaks on the road.
+ Two pedigrees are given in Amritsar :-
Jadu,
Sun.
Jad.
Kashab.
Salvahan.
Jadu.
Tawithar.
Jad.
Mauan.
Bhatti.
Chaundar,
Parbat.
Khatár.
Randháwá.
Murir.
Mán.
Tanun.
Mel.
Chondar.
Pippar.
Randháwá.
Six centuries ago they came from Námkot (sic) in the Málwa to Pakhu Thákur on (7) the
Ganges. This was during the Chauhan supremacy. Kamal, fourth in descent from Ran-
dbáwa, settled in Amritsar where his descendants founded Thera and five pindoris,
Bába Budha, who installed the fourth and fifth Gurús, belonged to this tribe. See below.
Š The account which follows is taken from a detailed account of the tribe drawn up by
Mr. R. Humphreys.



820
The Randhawas.
The Randháwas have certain cults which are, however, local rather
than tribal, being affected by several other Ját tribes and even by
people who are not Játs at all.
Originally all Sarwarias or Sultavis they were gradually converted
to Sikhism, and their conversion was completed in the time of Mahárája
Ranjit Singh. Thus after they had founded the village, the residents
of Bholeke* in Batála tabsil were at first Muhammadans of the sect of
Sushibán Mihman. Those of Chak Mihman and Kot Khazán had .em-
braced the worship of Sáhibán Mihman and Islám before settling in
their present villages.
The Randháwas also affect the shrine of Gurú Nának, the mound
of Sidh Sáhu, the shrine of Sahib Budha, the samádh of Sahib Mihmán,
the darbár of Sahib Rámkanr, and the darbár of Sahib Anúp Singh.
Most of the tribe visit the mound of Sidh Sáhu in the months of
Kátik and Hár to extract clay from the mound and offer sacrifices
there. These offerings are received by the Brahmans and mírasis of
the got, but the goats offered are received by the people of the
Randháwa got itself.
The story of Sáhib Budha is as follows ::- Bura or Sahib Budha, son of
Sugga, was descended from the Malt branch of the Randhawas. From
his early youth he attended Gurú Nának. His father had entrusted
him with the tending of his cattle. One day he left the cattle untended
and went to the Gurú. In his absence the cattle grazed in a cornfeld
and so owner of the field, in search of Bura, came to Gurú Nának, and
asked him where Bura was. The Gurú seeing his anger, changed the
boy into a white bearded old man and, in answer to the question said,
Brother, there is no boy named Bura here, but only an old man.”
Bura thereafter was called Budha, and became one of the favourite
disciples of the Gurú. de continued in the service of five gurus suc-
cessively from Gurú Nának to Guru Arjan.
Ten qurus descended from Sahib Budha, whose names are as
follows:-Sahib Bhana, Sáhib Jalál, Sáhib Sarwan, Sahib Jhanda,
Sahib Gurditta, Sáhib Rámkaur (also called Gurú Gurbakhsh Singh by
Cort Gobind Singh), Sahib Mohar Singh, Sáhib Shám Singh, Sáhib
Kahn Singh, and Sahib Suján Singh, son of Sahib Káhn Singh, who
died in infancy. The dărbár of Sahib Rámkaur is situate in Netan (?)
kot in Shakargarh tahsil, and that of Sahib Anúp, son of Rámkaur, is in
the village of Little Teja in Batála tahsil. These three darbárs are in
the possession of Udási Sádhus. The line of Sahib Budha terminated
with Sahib Saján Singh.
The line of hese three darbámur, is in
of the story of Rajáda, son of Bhola, is as follows :-Rajáda, eleven generations ago,
store some of the royal horses. The trackers traced the horses to the neighbourhood of
hooke Rajada, being apprised of this, killed the horses and buried them. The trackers
and exhumed the horses. Rajáda was arrested and brought before the king. The
ordered bim to be closely imprisoned. The culprit said that he would embrace Islám
he was pardoped. The Qázi forgave him and made him a Musalmán; for, according to
the precent of his religion, a prisoner is set free when he tecomes a Muslim. But his
Sost wife and his son, named Amin Shah, remained Hindus ; his second wife, however,
ñorama a convert to Muhammadanism with him. or it may be that Rajada, after being
vorted married a Muslim wife. By her he had three sons - Ablu, Adli and Jamála
whose descendants settled in the villages of Bholeke and Chak Mihman.
" Maiza wrestler or powerful man. It is used as a nickname in the Malwa.



Rándo--Rang Rangita.
321
Sáhib Mihmán, a Deo Ját by got, was one of the favourite disciples
of Gurá Nának. He continued in the service of the gurus from Gurú
Nának to Gurú Arjan, who was the fifth in descent from Nának. He
founded Chak Mihmán, and his grave is at that place. Near this mound
is situate a tank, which is deemed as holy as the Ganges itself by the
people of this sect. The story of the tank is as follows:-One of the
disciples of Sahib Mihmán, Parma by name, a Khatri of Kanirur in
Gurdaspur, was going to bathe in the Ganges. Sáhib Mihmán asked him
to take his stick and parna (a small piece of cloth used as a handker-
chief) with him and get them washed in the river. Parına, washed
the stick and hankerchief in the Ganges as he had promised, but by
chance they fell from his hands and were swept down the stream. Ho
sought for them, but in vain. After bathing, he returned to Sáhib
Mihman, who asked him for his stick and handkerchief, Parma told
him that he had lost them in the Ganges. Sáhib Mihmán then told
him to dive into the tank, which he did, and the stick and parna, which
had floated down the Ganges, came into his hands. Seeing this
miracle the people became convinced of Mihmán's saintly nature. He
had a well dug in the village Uchalwali in Gardáspur. This well is
still called after his uame. A Sádhu is stationed there, the Granth is
repeated, and a fair is held at the Amáwas every month. Women,
whose children die, bathe there in pregnancy at every Amáwas fair
until their child is born. People also take cattle which have been sick
to wash them there when they have recovered. Adam, disciple of
Sáhib Mihman and a Randhawa of the Wik branch, was also fainous
as a saint, Many people followed bin after seing his miracles; he
founded a new sect, which still exists. The followers of this sect, instead
of throwing the bones of the dead in the Ganges, throw them into the
above mentioned tank. On the death of young as well as of old, karáh
i.e. halwá, is prepared on the fourch day, an't no pind is made, nor is
kiria performed on the thirteenth day, only the recitations from the
Granth are made. A dinner is given to Sikhs, Brahmnas, and poor
persons. Clothes, couches and dishes are placed before the Granth
and ardás is performed. The head of the gaddi distributes some of the
clothes, etc., among such as he thinks deserving; the rest he takes
himself. If a sin be committed by any person, he can be purified here
without going to the Ganges, Shradh also is not observed on any
special tith (fixed day). Sádhus and Brahmans are feasted instead of
performing shradh during those tiths. There is no need of tháli
manáni, nor of observing any thai.
Fields are believed to be haunted by whirlwinds.* A giant, Juma
Shah, is believed to be imprisoned in a village called Kastiwal in tahsil
Batála. A fair is held every year at this place, and Juma Shah the
demon collects corn on that day for his subsistence for the whole year.
No one brings corn to his house about the time of that festival, fearing
lest the giant be offended and take away the whole of his corn.
Rándo, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Ranera, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Rana RANGITA, see Chhabíhwál.
perfon tith this to theommitted thinks the gada laced himnas, "a frin
* Wa-warola.



822
Ranghar-Rangi.
RANGHAR, RÁNGAR.--A class of Rajputs, usually Muhammadan, rarely Hindu.
The term is somewhat contemptuous and is applied in the eastern and
south-eastern Punjab to any Muhainmadan Rajput-at least by the
Hindus. If a Hindu Chauhán Rájput turns Muhammadan, he would
still be a Chauhán Rájput, but his Hindu kinsmen would also dub lim
Rángar, a term only a trifle less derogatory than chotikat, a term
applied to those who have, on conversion to Islám, cut off the scalplock
(choti).
It follows from the above account that the Ranghars have the same
seccions as the Rajputs, and they also retain mayy Hindu custoins.
Thus in Jind tahsil tliey claim.descent from Firoz, son of Bhura, the
first Hindu Rajput converted to Islám under Aurangzeb. They still
avoid one got in marriage and they also retain their Brahman parohits
who give them protective threads (pahunchi or rakshabandhan). to wear
on the wrist at the Salono, nurk or barley seedlings which they stick in
their pagris at the Dasehra. These Brahmans receive fees at these
festivals, and at weddings. A Ranghar bridegroom wears a sihra,* not
a maur or crown, on his forehead. Ranghars practise widow re-
marriage, although thuso who do so are looked down upon. Their
Wumen generally wear blue trousers, a kurti or bodice, and a blue and
red chádar or sheet. In the south-east the Ranghars are great cattle-
thieres aod liave an orgauised system under which chiefs, called aguás,t
take charge of stolen cattle and pass them on from one hidiny.place
to acother. When, and if, the rexl owner gets a clue, the aguas restore
the cattle to him for a sum, called bhunga, or black.mail, which is divid-
ed between them and the actual thieves. They believe iu Gúga Pír,
but most of them put great faith in Deri Shakti. Before starting on a
thieving expedition they often vow to offer a tenth part of the booty,
which is called dasaundh.
The following proverbs illustrate their turbulent and thieving
character :-
Ranghaệ mit ná kijiye, ui kanth nadán
Bhuká Ranghaș dhan haſé raja haşe parán.
“O ! Simple-minded husband, do not make friends with a Ranghar, for when hungry
he steals and when rich he murders."
Ranghaộ kiská piyárá le rok batáde nárá :
Ao tin ká, mol kare bárá le to le, nahin dikhawe talvárá.
“A Ranghar, dear to no one, borrows in cash and pays in cattle. He asks Rs. 12
for a cow worth 3, bidding one take it or look on the sword."
Another account, I of dubious authority, states that the original
issue of Rájput mothers and Muhammadan fathers are styled Rángarhs,
and these intermarry. But if these Rángarhs in turn marry ont of the
caste-i.e., their own, new caste, they become Sub-Rángarlis, like the
Gháttas among the Bánins. There is a body of Hindu Rangarhs, too,
the original issue of Rajput fathers and Muhammadan mothers, and sub-
Rángarhs similarly created.
RANGI, a sept of Játs found in Jind : see under Jaria.
* A garland.
+Forwarders,' fr. áge wálá, or age sambhalnewála.
*P. N. Q.,I,'$ 707. For the Gháttas seo under Sáha,



Rangreta-Rapál.
823
RANGRETA.--Used for a Chuhịa but especially of a Chuhra converted to
Sikhism. It is very possibly a corruption of the English word 'recruit,'
or it may be a diminution of Rangar, Ranghaſ. See under Mazbi.
Rangrez. See Lilári. The word is merely the Persian equivalent of dyer.
RangsÁz.-Painters of wood, and other materials; but not house painters,
who come under Mistri. Cf. Kimangar, Pharera.
Ránídaar, a Ját cla. (agricultural) found in Multán.
Ránízal, a heterogeneous community of Swáti, Bajazai, Khattak and Utinán
Khel Pathans who occupy the long narrow strip of country which
ruos between the hills which form the southern boundary of Swát and
the border of British Iudia. Of this strip the hilly part is called Garh
and the plain Sam. Till recent years the latter tract formed part of
the territory of the Ránízai tribe of Lower Swát but that tribe proferred
the climate of Swát and left Sain Ránízai to its tenants and dependants.
These, however, soon threw off their allegiance to the Ránízai and have
held the tract as owners, being known as Sam and Garh Ránízai re-
spectively. Necessity has inade the Sam Ránízai a united people, and
they are a fine manly community of good physique and valour. Their
land is not redistributed periodically.
RÁNJAA, -AN, Ná, a tribe of Rájput status, chiefly found in the eastern uplands
of Shahpur and Gujrái between the Jheluin and Chenáb, though
they have, in small numbers, crossed both rivers into the Jhelum
and Gujranwala districts. They are for the most part returned as Játs
except in Shahpur and might, with equal accuracy, be described as of
Ját status. They are, however, Bhatti Rajputs; and thcugh they are
said in Gujrát to have laid claim of Jate years to Qureshi origin as
descendants of Abú Jabl, uncle of the Propliet, whose son died at
Ghazoi, whence his lineage emigrated to the Kirána bár, yet they still
retain many of their Hindu customs. They were described by Colonel
Davies as "a peaceable and well-disposed section of the population,
subsistiug chiedy by agriculture. In physique they resemble their
neighbours the Gondals, with whom they interwarry freely."
RÁNKI-DOTAL, fr. ránki, 'private,' and dotal, smoke-maker; a class of de-
pendents in Spiti who have a hearth to themselves, but no other in-
terest in land. They hold land of a particular head of a family and
are espected to do a great deal of work for him. The term rúnki
deuotes this dependenco on a particular landholder.
Ránotka, a title doubtless derived from Ránáputra,* 'the son of a Ráná,' as
Rájput from Rájá. It may possibly be identified with the caste-vanie
Rotar which occurs in Kashtwaſ. Toe Rotars, who are sinall in
number, are said to have held Kashtwar before it became thie seat of a
Rája, and tradition says that they cnce ousted the Rája and for a short
tiwe enjoyed their former independence.
RANSINĖ, one of the principal muhins or clans of the Kharrals, with its
head-quarters at Pindi Cheri aud Pir Ali in Montgomery,
RAPál, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
* Cf. autar, a sonless man, from aputra : Vogel, Antiquities of Chamba, I, p. 235,



324
Ráshi-Ráthi.
Ráshi, Pathans of the labouring class.
RASÚL Shání.- One of the irregular Muhammadan orders, said to have been
founded by one Rasul Shah of Báwalpur near Alwar, who in the
eighteenth century obtained his miraculous powers from a saint in
Egypt, who communicated them through a merchant of Alwar. They
wear a white or red handkerchief on the head tied in the shape of a
peaked cap: they also keep a handkerchief containing ashes, wbich
they rub on their bodies and faces; they shave the heaờ, moustaches
and eyebrows, wear woodeu clogs and in the hot weather carry hand
fans. They not only see no barm in drinking spirits, but look on it as
a virtue, and it is said tbat they have or had tili lately a special license
to manufacture their own liquor. Their taste for drink drew them into
close sympathy with the Sikh Sirdárs of pre-annexation times and
Ranjit Singh is stated to have allowed them a monthly grant of Rs. 200
for spirits. They are a small sect and not celibate. As a rule men
well-io do, they are never seen begging; and many of them are men of
literary tastes, popularly credited with a knowledge of alchemy. Their
chief centre in the Punjab is a building near the Landa bazár in Lahore,
and they have also a building in the environs of that city near Khúí
Míran, but are also returned from Jhelum.
RATAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
RATÁL -A term used for a Dúmná in Gurdaspur. The Ratál, like the
Batwal, is a low Hindu caste- viz., sinrilar to the Dumná and Chamár.
His occupation is that of sepi or agricultural menial in the village.
RATANPÁL, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Ráth, fem. -Ní.--(1) A title given to Játs, Gujars and Dogars : lit, fierce, cruel
or barbarous.-Panjabi Dicty., p. 960. · (2) A tribe, akin to the
Dhudhis, found in the Pákpattan tahsil of Montgomery about 15 miles
south-west of Pák pattan town. They claim to be Punwár Rájputs, and
their ancestors settled in the Mailsi tract of Multán when they were
converted to Islán. In Chadhi Mashaikh of that district Háji Sher
Muhanımad, a saint of this tribe, still has a shrine. They are men-
tioned in historical records as early as the first half of the 14th century.
When the Delhi empire was breaking up they left Multán and settled
in their present seats. They are considered fair agriculturists, and
Ráth Panwar is now returned as a Rájput clan (agricultural) from
Montgomery. See also under Pacháhda.
Rátal, (1) a tribe of Játs in Rohtak who claim to be by origin Túnwar
Rájputs, and are among the oldest inbabitants of the tract. They are
descended from Bhága, a brother of Jogi Dás, the ancestor of the Rohal
and Dhankar Játs, and the three tribes do not intermarry. They are
found in Karnál, Delhi and Gurgaon as well as in Rohtak, and apparent-
Jy in Ludhiána, though it is, perhaps, doubtful whether these last are
the same tribe. In Karnál their head-quarters are said to be at
Manápa and Bal Játán in which they settled from. Bahadurgarh in
Rohtak. In Jind they claim descent from a Ráthor Rájput, who con-
tracted a karewa marriage. They revere Bandeo. (2) A class of
Rajputs found in the Kángra Hills, and in Chamba.
Thákar, Ráthi, and Ráwat.—These are described by Ibbetson as castes allied to the Ráj.
puts. The Thákar (or, as he believed it more properly should be, Thakkar) and Ráthi are
T® Bahade, who.com of



The Ráthis.
325
the lower classes of Hill Rajputs who, though they are admittedly Rájputs and give their
daughters to Rájputs who are styled by that title, do not reach the standard which would
entitle them to be called Rájput, but are, on the other hand, above the Ráwat.* The line
between Rájput and Thákar is defined, so far as it is capable of definition, in the following
paragraph. The line between Thakar and Ráthi may be roughly said to consist in the fact
that Ráthis do and Thákars do not ordinarily practise widow-marriage; though the term
Ráthi is commonly applied by Rájputs of the ruling houses to all below them. Again the
line between Ráthi and Kanet is exceedingly difficult t) draw; in fact, in Chamba, Ráthi
and Kanet are considered identical and are said to eat and marry together, and it is said that
Ráthi is in Chamba and Jammu only another name for the same people who are called Kanet
in Kulu and Kángra. Thus no Kanets but numerous Ráthis are returne:l from Chamba. On
the other hand, no other of the Hill States returns oither Thákars or Ráthis, having probably
included the former with Rájputs and the latter with Kanots. Even Sir J. B. Lyall said:
" Our Kángra torm Ráthi is a rough word to apply to any but the lowest class "; and
speaking of Kulu, he says: “The children of a Brahman or Rájput by a Kanet wife are
called Bráhmans and Rájputs, the term Ráthi being often added as a qualification by any
one who himself pretends to unmixed blood.”
Mr. G. C. Barnes wrote tuus of the dietinction between Thákar and Ráthi :--The Ráthis
are essentially an agricultural class, and prevail throughout the Núrpur and Nadáon
parganahs. The Ráthis and the Ghiraths constitute the two great cultivating tribes in
these hills; and it is a remarkable fact that in all level and irrigated tracts, wherever the
soil is fertile and produce exuberant, the Ghiraths abound; while in the poorer uplands
where the crops are scanty and the soil demands severe labour to compensate the hus.
bandmen, the Ráthis predominate. It is as rare to find a Ráthi in the valleys as to meet
a Ghirath in the more secluded hills. Each class holds possession of its peculiar domain,
and the different habits and associations created by the different localities have impressed
upon each caste a peculiar physiognomy and character. The Ráthis generally are a robust
and handsome race; their features are regular and well-defined; the colour usually fair :
and their limbs athletic, as if exercised and invigorated by the stubborn soil upon which
their lot is throwi. On the other hand, the Ghirath is dark and coarse featured, his body
is stunted and sickly; goitre is fearfully prevalent among his race; and the reflection
occurs to the mind that, however teeming and prolific the soil, bowever favourable to
vegetable life, the air and climate are not equally adapted to the development of the
human frame.
“ The Ráthis are attentive and careful agriculturists. Their women take little or no part
in the labours of the field. In origin they belong neither to the Kshatriya nor to the Súdra
class, but are apparently an amalgamation of both. Their ranks are being constantly
increased by defections from the Rajputs, and by illegitimate connections. The offspring
of a Rajput father by a Súdra mother would be styled a Rážbi, and accepted as such by the
brotherhood. The sects of the Ráthis are innumerable; no one could render a true and
faithful catalogue of them. They are as numerous as the villages they inhabit, from which
indeed their distinguishing names are generally derived. A Ráthi is cognizant only of the
sects which immediately surround him. They form a society quite sufficient for his few
wants, and he has little idea of the extent and ramifications of his tribe. The higher sects
of the Ráthis are generally styled Thákars. They are affronted at being called Ráthis,
although they do not affect to be Rajputs, The best families among the Thákars give their
daughters in marriage to the least eligible of the Rájputs, and thus an affinity is established
between these two great tribes. The Ráthis generally assume the thread of caste, They
avoid wine, and are extremely temperate and frugal in their habits. They take money for
daughters, or exchange them,-a practice reprobated by the Shastras and not countenanced
by the highest castes. On the death of an elder brother the widow lives with the next
brother, or, if she leaves his household, he is entitled to recover her value from the husband
she selects. Altogether, the Ráthis are the best hill subjects we possess ;-their manners
are simple, quiet, and unaffected; they are devoted to agriculture, not unacquainted with
the use of arms; honest, manly, industrious and loyal."
Here he makes Thákars first class Ráthis. ir J. B. Lyall, on the other hand seemed
inclined to class Thákars as second or third class Rájputs. Speaking of the caste tables
which he appends to his reports, in which he classes the Hindu population under the heads
of first grade Brahman; second grade Brahman ; first grade Rájput; second grede Rájput ;
Khatris, Mahajans, Kirárs, etc. ; first grade Súdras, Thákars, Ráthis, etc. ; second grade
Súdras; he wroté :-" The Rajput clans of the second grade might more properly be called
?: first grade Thákars : among the most distinguished and numerous of them are the
* But the Ráwat do not appear to be found in the hills or in any tract where Thákars or
Ráthis are settled. It is doubtful then if the Ráwat can be regarded as below either of
those groups. He is a caste of the submontane: see below_p. 337,



826
The Ráthis.
Habrols, the Pathiála, the Dhatwals, the Indaurias, the Nángles, the Gumbaris, tho.
Ránes, the Baniáls, the Ranáts, the Mailes. They marry their daughters to tbe Miáns, and
tako daughters in marriage from the Ráthis. In the statements most of the Thákars have
beeu entered as second class Rijputs, and a few as first class Súdras. Most of the Thákars
entered iu this last class might more properly have been classed as Ruthis. The Núrpur
Thákars are all no better than Ráthis. A l'hákar, if asked in what way he is better than a
Ráthi, will say that his own manners and social customs, particularly in respect of selling
daughters, marrying brother's widow, etc., are more like those of tbe Mían class than those
of the Ráthis are. The best line of distinction, however, is the marriage connection; tho
Mián will marry a Thákar's daughter, but not a Ráthi's. The Rathi's daughter marries a
Thákar, and her daugliter can then marry a Mián. No one calls himself a Ráthi, or likes
to be addressed as one. The term is understood to convoy some degree of slight or insult;
the distinction between Thákar and Ráthi is however very loose. A rich man of a Ráthi
family, like shib Diál, Chaudhri of Chetru, marries his daughter to an impoverished Raja,
and his whole clan gets a kind of step and becomes Thákar Rajput. So again a Rája out
riding falls in love with a l'atial girl herding cattle, and marrits her, whereupon the whole
clan begins to give its daughters to Miáns. The whole thing reminds one of the struggles
of families to rise in society in England, except that the numbers interested in the struggle
are greater here, as man cannot separate himself entirely from his clan, and must take it
up with him or stay where he is, and except that the tactics or rules of the game are here
stricter and more formal, and the movement much slower.”
The Ráthi does not seem to be a favourite in Kángra. Here are two
proverbs about him-Jau gharáțín, Ráthí káthin. “Barley (is best) in
the water-mill and the Ráthí in the stocks"; and “a Ráthi, a goat, a
devotee, and a widow woman, all need to be kept weak, for, if strong,
they will do mischief.”
The status of the Ráthi in relation to the Kane'r and the GHIRATE is
defined in the proverb Chauthi pirhi Ráthní kí Rúni han júe: “In
the fourth generation a Ráthi woman becomes a Ráni," i.e. it takes
four generations to make a Ráni out of a Ráthni woman.
Of the Thákur gots in Kángra the Phúl and Järotia are the most
numerous, but the Balotra, Barhái, Chángra, Dharwal, Gurdwal, Goital,
Mangwal, Phawál, and Rákor are also strongly represented. In
Chamba the Chophal appear to be the most numerous. The Balotra
are also found in Gurdaspur, but in that District the Panglána is the
strongest got numerically. The favourite gotra is Kásib. As a local
saying goes there are as many clans of Ráthis as there are kinds of grass.
Dr. J. Hutchison contributes the following account of them :-
“ The Ráthis and Thákurs or Thakkars, are found in the outer hills
between the Chenab and the Beas. They include a large proportion of the
high caste population in this area and muy be regarded as the common
people par excellence of the hills. No traditions exist among thein, as
among some of the other castes, pointing to migration from the plains,
and their great numerical importance and wide distribution seem to
indicate that, for a very long period, they have been settled in the hills,
In origin they are generally regarded as being the result of an amal-
gamation of the castes above and below them but it seems hardly possible
that such a large community can have come into existence wholly in
this way. A wore probable explanation is given by Sir J B. Lyall. He
says :- There is an idea current in the hills that of the land holding
castes, the Thákurs, Ráthis, Kanets and Ghirths are either indigenous
to the hills, or indigenous by the half blood; and that the Brahmaas,
Rájputs and others are the descendants of invaders and settlers from
the plains. This popular idea probably gives us the clue to the true
origin of the Thákurs and Ráthis. It is also in keeping with a common
saying in the hills which runs thus :-Chanál jethá, Ráthi kanetha,



The Ráthis.
827
meaning: “The Chanál is the elder brother; the Ráthi the younger.”
The signification attached to this saying by the people is that the high
castes are dependent on the Chanál3 (low castes), just as a younger
brother is on an elder one. No ceremony of any importance can take
place without their presence and help-at births, marriages and deaths
they are indispensable in one capacity or another. It seems improb-
able, however, that this was the original signification, which has be-
come obscured through the lapse of ages. It is more likely that the
saying is an unconscious expression of the general conviction that the
Chanáls were the original inhabitants of the hills. The Ráthis came at
a later period; yet so long a time has passed since even they migrated
to the mountains, that they are generally regarded as having been
always resident there.
“There can be little doubt that, as a hill tribe, they are older than
the Brahmans and Rájputs, who came from the plains at a later period;
and we may safely conclude that the oldest strata among them are
descended, either directly or by the half blood, from the early Aryan
colonists of the hills. The first Aryan immigrants, as we now know,
intermarried freely with the aborigines, resulting in a fusion of the two
races from which inay have sprung the various low caste tribes now
forming such an important part of the population. But the complete-
ness of the fasion was not at all times uniform, and later waves of
immigration may have remained more or less isolated, forming the
nucleus of the community which now comprises the Thákurs and Ráthis.
But while this was probably the origin of the tribes it is certain that
the general opinion regarding them is also well founded. That they
have received large accessions from the other castes by defections from
the Brahmans and Rájputs and by amalgamation of these castes with
the Sudras, is hardly open to doubt. This is the general belief among
themselves and their family traditioris all tend to confirm it. We may
therefore regard the Thákurs and Ráthis as being pow & conglomerate
people, representing the ultimate product of the welding together of
many different contributions tº their ranks.
"The Thákurs usually wear the janeo, but the Ráthis, like the Kanets,
are divided into two sections, one of which has and the other has not
the thread of caste: but no names are in use to mark this distinction.
Probably the majority are without the sacred thread. The name
• Ráthi' is most likely derived from the Sanskrit word ráshtra, meaning
kingdom, subjects of a kingdom.'
“In Kángra and Jammu the proportion of Ráthis to Thákurs in the
tribe is small; and even the name' Rájhi'is regarded as conveying
some degree of slight or insult. In Chamba, on the contrary the pro-
portion is large, the Thákurs being found chiefly in the low hills to the
south of the first high range, while the Ráthis abound in the interior.
Nothing derogatory attaches to the name and the high estimation in
which the Ráthis are held in the State was found expression in the
following popular saying :--Kukari siyán-i-Ráthi puchhiyán. “As the
Indian corn is the first among crops : so the Ráthis are the most
important among castes.'
“There are reasons for believing that some of the earliest rulers in
the bills of whom we have any knowledge belonged to this tribe. That



328
The Ráthis.
the rulers of ancient times were exclusively of the warrior caste seems
highly improbable. In the other castes also must have been men of
strong individuality, who came to the front and took their place as
leaders : just as we know they have done in every age of Indian history.
The distribution of the existing families, descended from those ancient
rulers, as well as their family traditions, lend support to this conclusion :
which also explains the origin of the Thákur section of the tribe. We
may assume that having gained authority over a small portion of
territory Each of these Ráthi leaders took or was given the title of
Thákur, meaning 'lord'. The various offshoots of the ruling families
would naturally seek a distinctive name for themselves and thus the
word ?hökur probably acquired the secondary meaning which it still
boars as the name of a distinct caste. An exactly analogous use of a
title is afforded in the word Ráná. Originally applied only to the petty
Rájput chiefs it afterwards acquired a wider meaving as a caste name
to differentiate the Ráná families from ordinary Rájputs. It is still so
used and all the Ráná families in the hills return themselves under this
caste name. Not only so but even the title Rája is now in use in a
similar way in some of the old royal families of the hills
" The Thákur caste, however, is larger than can be satisfactorily
accounted for in this way and we must conclude that in later times it has
received large accessions from the higher castes, especially the Rájputs,
by intermarriages and other connections. It is probable, too, that in
the outer hills especially, many Ráthis have assumed the name of
Thákur, for in some parts the two names are regarded as almost
synonymous. The Rájás also, in former times, used to confer the right
to wear the janeo with a step in social rank, in return for gifts or
special services.
/ “The distinction between Thákurs and Ráthis is a loose one. On the
whole, however, the Thákurs rank a little higher than the Ráthis, and
their marriage affinity with Rajputs tends to raise them still more in
the social scale. The Thákur families that form such marriage alliances
do not practise karera or widow remarriage : but the custom is common
among all other Thákurs and Ráthis. Perhaps the best line of distinc-
tion is the marriage connection, a Mián Rájput will take the daughter of
a Thákur in marriage, but not that of a Ráthi, and he does not give his
own in return. The Ráthi's daughter, however, can marry a Thákur
and her daughter can then marry a Mián. Some of the Thákur families
claim to be Rájpuis but this claim is not acknowledged by the other
castes.
“The Thákurs* and Ráthis are essentially a'n agricultural class and
often speak of themselves simply as zamindár, and in their general
character and devotion to agriculture they present a strong resemblance
to the Játs of the plains. They are strong and robust of frames, also
patient and industrious and inured to toil. At the same time they are
not unwarlike and ipany of them join the army. In the outer hills
their women are said to take little or no part in field labour ; but in
Chamba, except among the higher ranks and better class families, even
* The line between the Ráthis and Kanet is also difficult to draw. In Chamba they are
regarded as one and the same caste as also in Jammu. In KángȚa the Kapets seem to rank
helow the Ráthis, but few of them are found west of the Beas.



Ráthi-Rathor,
329
the women are not exempt from such work. The sects of the Ráthis
are as numerous as the villages they inhabit; from which, indeed, their
als or family names are generally derived. A Ráthi is cognizant only
of the sects that immediately surround him and bas little idea of the
ramifications of his tribe. They take money for their daughters or
exchange them. On the death of an elder brother the widow lives with
the next brother or if she l'aves his household he is entitled to recover
her value from the husband she marries.
“Mr. Barnes has the following description of the Ráthis and Girths in
Kangra :- The Ráthis and the Girths constitute tho two great cultivate
ing tribes in these hills; and it is a remarkable fact that in all level
and irrigated tracts, wherever the soil is fertile and produce exuberant,
the Girths abound: while in the poorer uplands, where the crops are
scanty and the soil demands severe labour to compensate the husband-
man the Ráthis predominate. It is as rare to find a Ráthi in the
valless as a Girth in more secluded hills. Each class holds possession
of its peculiar domain; and the different habits and association of the
different localities have impressed upon each caste a peculiar physi.
ognomony and character. The Ráthis generally are a robust and hand.
some race: their features are regular and well defined: the colour
usually fair: and their limbs athletic, as if exercised and invigorated
by the stubborn soil upon which their lot is cast. ...... Altogether
the Ráthis are the best hill subjects we possess; their manners are
simple, quiet and unaffected: they are devoted to agriculture, not un.
acquainted with the use of arms, honest, manly, industrious and loyal.'
These words, in the main, are still true of the Thákurs and Ráthis
throughout the whole area in which they dwell."
In the Simla Hills Thákur is little more than a title, equivalent or
nearly so to Ráná, and the thákurai is variously defined to mean tbe
epoch of thákur rule or the tract subject to that rule. The period of
thinkur rule was later than that of the Mávis, but earlier than the
existing organization into large states with dependent baronies under
Ránas or Thákurs, sometimes still designated fhákurais.
The ancient pargana of Kotáha, lying at the foot of the hills east
of Kalka, was once governed by fourteen thakurs. To one of them,
by name Mán Chand, the pargana was granted in jägir by the Rájás of
sirmur. When Rája Jagat Parkásh (1342-55) came to the throne
he demauded Suwati, Mán Chand's daughter, in marriage but was
refused her hand. He accordingly attacked Mán Chand who collected
the 22 Kanet khels of the porgana to resist him but was compelled to
flee to Delbi where he turned Muhammadan and gave his daughter
to the emperor Jahangir. Onder the name of Rájá Moman Murad
he reconquered Kotáha up to the Búrsingh Deo range. Varying
accounts are giveu of bis end, but on his death the pargana passed
into the possession of the Mirs of Kotaha. Morni, a hill in this tract, is
said to be named after the wife of Moman Murád.*
RATHOR.--The Káthor are one of the 36 royal races, and Solar Rajputs.
Their old seat was Kapauj, but their more modern dynasties are to be
fonnd in Marwar and Bikáner. They are returned from many districts
in the Punjab, but are nowhere numerous. In Montgomery they call
To be turned me to resist him an Chand meme but wa
* Wynyard, in Amballa Settlement Rep. and P. N. Q. I, § 761,



330
Rathyah-Ráwal.
themselves Ráthor Chaahán and are still Hindus. But in Hissár the
Chauhans appear to be distinct from, or do not recognise, the Ráthor.
The Sanskrit form of the name is Ráshtrakúta. See under Ruhtor also.
RATHvar, a Ját clan (agricultaral) found in Multán.
Rato, a Ját clan found in Ludhiana, where it cuts a jandi tree after a wed.
ding. Its worsbip is then performed along with the bride, and & Brah-
man is given cloth and Mansúri pice.
Rattol, a Ját clan found in Ludhiana. It cuts the jandi tree at a marriage
and the man who cuts it is given cloth, etc., according to one's means.
Returning home they play with the kangna which consists of a supári
struog on a thread, an iron ring, & cowrie, a bit of majith, and a
piece of red cloth containing rice. This is tied to the bridegroom's hand
by a Brahman, before the wedding procession starts, and a rupee is paid
him for it. In the same way a kangna is tied to the bride's hand.
This is afterwards tlırown seven times into a tray full of water by a
barber woman. If the boy takes it oat first, he is deemed mesterful,
but if the girl finds it first the boy and his parents are much ashamed.
Rául, Raul, fem. Rauliáni, 800 Rawal. See Panjabi Dicty., p. 964, dim.
Resá (also=a precious boy), p. 964.
Rádrá, a Rohilla who speaks Pashtú, used disparagingly.-Panjábi Dicty.,
p. 962.
Ráut, fem. •SÁNI, -NI, Ráwat. - Panjábi Dicty., p. 962.
RAWÁRI, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Rawal, a Gujar tribe, which claims descent from Dhundpál, a Rajput from
beyond Lahore,' who married the daughter of Ghok bar, à Gujar.
It claims to belong to the Ghokharbansi clan, and is almost certainly of
Khokhar origin, driving its name from Rua Sarsa near Lahore. They
once held a búrah and a satáisi, groups of 12 and 27 yillages
respectively, in Karnál, where they are still found in the Khádir tract.
RÁWAL.-10 Amritsar it is said that the ancestor of this tribe, Ryál, was in
the service of the Prophet. Once when alms were being given by the
Prophet no one came forward to receive them, wbereapon Ryál
accepted them. Since then the members of this tribe have been sub-
sisting on charity. They are called Ráwal after their ancestor Ryál.
The term Ráwal is, however, generally used as a synonym for Jogi,
though, strictly speaking, it denotes à Muhammadan Jogi, who is,
indeed, generally spoken of as a "Jogi-Ráwal.' In Rajputána and
elsewhere Ráwal is a title, Sanskritised as Rájakula.*
The Ráwals of the Sialkot District are all Muhammadans. It may be
conjectured that they are descendants of once pious Hindú Jogís who
accepted Islám. A thorough knowledge of the lore of the Hindu
Jogis added to that acquired by Mubammadan faqirs has enabled them
to acquire their present position in native society. They profons to be
beggars and most of them really are so. A jogi will go about singing
pathetic as well theosophic bymps and very soon grows rich. Some
of them are hakims (physicians), though they bave never been students
of medicine. In some instances, however, they are good physicians.
* J. R. A. 8., 1908, p. 532,



The Rawats.
881
They practise surgery and their eye operations often cause injury to
the simple country-folk who submit to their treatment. They gene-
rally pass the rainy season at home and go out at the beginning of
winter. Their skill in medicine is not much appreciated at home, but
they return from abroad laden with silver. They are also the heredi-
tary astrologers of the Punjab. In other parts of India they pose as
great physicians, saints or Hindú fakirs of some respectable order. It
is not difficult for u Rawal to pass for years as a Hindú, and it is
astonishing how men of such low-birth and training can deceive people
in other provinces and return home with thousands of rupees. They
spend money as easily as they earn it.
Some of the Ráwals of the Punjab are notorious cheats. One of
their favourite devices, says Ibbetson, is to personate a long lost relative,
Io the Province itself they seldom venture upon open crime; but they
travel about the Central Provinces and the Deccan and even visit
Bombay and Calcutra, and there pilter and rob. They are often absent
for long periods on these expeditions; and meanwhile the Bunyas of
their villages support their families on credit, to be repaid with interest
on the return of the father. Soine interesting information regarding
them will be found in Selected Papers, No. XVIII of 1867 of the
Punjab Police Department. The town of Ráwalpindi is named after
them. There they are said, in addition to their usual pursuits, to
recite at the Muharram stories of the doings of Mahomet, accounts of
his miracles, and hymns in his praise. The crimin-l Rawals of Amritsar
are divided into jholi-hathas, who carry a wallet, and jogís The latter
thuagh Mubammedans are averse to circumcision and assume the
character of a Hindu monk. They regard themselves as more respectable
than the jholi-hatha, but are the worse cheats.
RAWAT, Ráwant, Ránt, Ránwat, Rawat, Ratont or Ront.* Ibbetson wrote:
« The Ráwat has been returned as a Ját tribe, as a Rajput tribe, and
as a separate caste. The Ráwat is found in the sub-montane districts,
and down the whole length of the Jumna Valley. It is very difficult
to separate these people from the Ráthis of the Kangſa hills ; indeed
they would appear to occupy much the same position in the sub-montane
as the Ráthis or even the Kanets do in the higher range«, They are
admittedly a clan of Chandel Rajputs; but they are the lowest clan who
are recognised as of Rájput stock, and barely if at all admitted to
communion with the other Rájputs, while under no circumstances
would even a Ráthi marry a Ráwat woman. They practise widow.
marriage as a matter of course. There can, I think, be little doubt
that the Chandel are of aboriginal stock, and probably the same as the
Chandál of the hills of whom we hear so much ; and it is not impossible
that these men became Chanáls where they were conquered and de.
spised outcasts, and Rijputs where they enjoyed political power. The
Ráwat is probably akin to the Ráo sub-division of the Kanets, whom
again it is most difficult to separate froin the Ráthis ; and the Chandel
Rajputs also have a Ráo section. In Delhi a group returns itself as
Ráwat Gaure." In Gurgaon the Ráwat are a large Ját got, holding
The word appears to be a patronymic like many others ending in -áwat and .ot.. It may
thus mean 'son of a Rao.' Or it may be a diminutive (like squireen fr. squiro). In Banswara
among the Bhils Ráwat is a title,='headman': Rajputáná Gazetteer, p. 115.



382
Rawani-Rehr.
eight villages and shares in 27 others. There are a few Ráwat villages
in Ludhiana also. The following note comes from Gurgaon :-
“There are two parties in Rajputina: One of them is called Ráwat. They are Hindus.
The other is called Merat, and they are Muhammadans. But in spite of the difference in
religion these two parties intermarry. It a Ráwat girl is married to a Merat she lives
like a Muhammadan and vice versa."
Rawání, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
RAWANRI, a synonym of gadba in Pesháwar. A shepherd or grazier.
Raváß, a Ját clan (agricultural) .found in Amritsar. See Riár.
RAZAR.-One of the 8 branches of the Muhammadzai Pathans : see p. 233
supra.
REDBU, a Ját got descended from its eponym, who founded Kandela in
tahsil Jind and has held 14 villages in that tabsíl for 25 generations,
It migrated to Jind State from Hissár.
REHAR, REHR or Reş.-Rahír is incorrect. A low caste closely allied to the
Dúmna but higher than the Chanal and lower than the Koli. He
works in bamboo like the Dúmna, but also travels about as a minstrel
like the Hensi. Found only in the hills he appears to be confined to
the Kángra and Simla Hills. In the latter he is described as a
shepherd, but he also makes bamboo baskets like the Dúm. The two
castes, however, do not intermarry, though each can drink water touched
by the other, and can smoke the same pipe. They can also smoke
with the Dági and Chamár, the only distinction being that they will
not eat food cooked by a Dági or Chamár. The Rer also work as
sweepers while the Dúms do not. The Rers are not found in the lower
hills, or Chanals in the upper. It is doubtful if the Rehſ is the same
as the RIBÁRA.
REBGAR.-Cf. Shorágar.
REMÁN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
RenB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
REYA, a small Hindu caste found only in the Delhi district. They say they
were Rajputs but were excluded from the caste because they took to
practising karewa or widow-marriage. They are now quite separate.
They eat and smoke with Játs and agricultural castes of similar stand.
ing, but will not marry them except by karewa. They own 9 villages
in Delhi, and the names of their clans are sometimes Rájput and some-
times not. : They trace their origin from Mahrauli where the Qutb
pillar stands.
RIÁR, Rıyár, a Ját tribe found in Gurdaspur. It gives its name to the
Riárki traot.
Rip, a clan of Ját status found in Shujábád tahsil, Multán district.
RIHÂN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Sháhpar.
RIÁRA or Regába.The Rehára is an outcaste like the Dúmpa, Hálí, Sepi,
etc., but he is not a Dúmna, with whom he will not eat. Be has a
distinct calling, making trinkets of the base metals for the Gaddi
women. Like the Reok he is found in Kángra and also in Chamba.
He is a strolling minstrel but also makes bamboo baskets, plays on the
Owc. fife and drum at Gaddi weddings and other festivities, and works as a
zhe pavvy. Some people class him as a Ghirth, and his powers of annoy-



Rijála-Rind.
383
ing children by sorcery make the people pet as well as fear him. His
name is also spelt ROHÁRA, but he appears to have no connection with
that tribe. In Chamba the workers in brass in the Barmaur wizárat
are calleci riháras. They make huqqas, anklets, bangles, etc., and also
play the senha at temples. The name is said to be derived from rihárá,
the characteristic brass anklet worn by Gaddi women.
RIJÁLA (fr. rizála, degraded), a term applied to the Brah macháris, a sub-
order of the Jogis. To it belongs the mahant of the Kanphára Jogi
asthal at Bobar in Rohtak. It has appropriated all the endowments
of that monastery. The Rijálas abstain from flesh and liquor, wear
loog ochre-coloured robes, do not marry, and only admit members
of the better castes. They are constantly at litigation with the
NANGAS.
RIND, the most important of the main Baloch trikes and sometimes loosely
used to include others. Most of the tribes of Rind descent are known
by distinctive names, but the Rinds of Mand in Makrán and Shorán in
Kachhi adhere to the name and it is also used by large numbers of
Baloch outside the tumans in Dera Gházi Khán and in other districts
of the Punjab. The Tibbi Lund tuman also has a Rind clan. Indeed
it may be said that the term is now used in three ways:-
(1) As a general term by which all Baloch of pure blood are known
to distinguish them from others of inferior descent or mixed blood who
are still known as Baloch,
(2) As a special tribal name borne by some Baloch many of these
belong to scattered or broken tribes and remember nothing of their
origin except that they are Rinds, and this probably accounts for most
of the Baloch described in the Punjab Census tables as Riuds.
(3) Rind is the name of one of the three clans, Lund, Khosa and
Rind, into which the Tibbi Lund tribe is divided.
The descent from Rind to Mir Sahák is variously given. Generally
Sahák is considered to be the son of Rind, but Ahmad Khán Ludhianí
Lund gives the following :-
Rind.
Razmán.
Nau-Nasir Dín.
Husain.
Mír Ahmad.
Naubat.
Bráhim.
Gilo.
Husain.
Mubarak.
Shan Ali
Pheroz.
Knime (married Mai Báno Khoh-phrosh,
(ancestor of the who after his death afterwards called
2 Mazáris,
inarried a goalherd Legbari, ancestor
Kalo.
Bahar . q.v.) (buzdár), hence the of the Legbaris.
1. (ancestor of the Gishkhauris).
Bozdárs).
Gilo.
Pherosháh.
Y&kúb
(ancestor of the Kasránis).
Sabák.



384
Rindowáná. Rom.
Babák.
Hasan,
Shalhak,
Mir Chakar.
Hamal.
Bhánari
(daughter).
Shahzád.
Shalhak,
q.v.)
Réhán. Jiand. Muhammad. Bráhim, Mirhan. Nohakh. Gyander, Rais, Hamal,
alias Khoh.
(ancestor of ancestor
phrosh alias Leghár
the Bughtis, of the
(ancestor of the Legháris,
9.v.) Raisánis
q.v)
(but those ara
generally classed
as Brahui).
Ali
Sher Ali
Bashk Ali
(ancestor of (ancestor of the (ancestor of the
the Lunds, q.V, and Ghulá n Bolak Syáh-phadh
of the shambá nís, of Sibi). Sectiou of Durkánı
Gorchánis).
The Rinds of Shorán, whose chief is Sardár Khan, are generally recog-
nized as the purest in descent by Baloch everywhere. The wars between
the Rinds and the Lasháris and the invasion of the Indus valley
form the subject of numerous heroic ballads, and have a historical
foundation.
RINDOWÁNá, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Roda, Roppá, shaven, entirely shaved as to the head. Rodá sádhú a fagir
who has his head entirely shaved.-Panjabi Dioty., p. 990.
Rode, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
ROCHAN-OAR, -KAST.-A magniloquent synonym for Cháki, i.q. Teli, in Dera
Ghái Kháu..
ROBÁwe, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
RODELA, RADELA, of a, belonging to a hill (Multáni, Potohári).
RUDELLA, a Rohilla, Khaibari.. Panjábi Dicty., pp. 970, 975.
ROKIE, a Jaç clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
RONGá, a Ját clar. (agricultural) found in Multán,
ROŅGAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Ropál, an Aráiy clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Rux.--The real seat of the Punjab Rors, wrote Ibbetson, is in the great
dhúk jongles south of Thálesar in Karnal where they hold a chaurási
moniinally consisting of 84 villages, of which the village of Amin,
where the Pándavas arrayed their forces before their last fight with the
Karavas, is the tika or head village. But the Rors have spread
down the Western Jumna Canal into the lower parts of Karnal
and into Jind in considerable numbers. There is a Ros bára or
group of 12 villages, south of Kaithal, whose got is Taran. They
are said also to hold 12 villages beyond the Ganges. They are
21



Rora-Roshania.
385
there. The Aftank and he cast o es mer escaped the story an origin
Badli in the Jhaglof them say they are, and they pra
fine stalwart men, of very much the same type as the Játs, whom
they almost equal as husbandmen, their women also working in
the fields. They are more peaceful and less grasping in their habits
than the Játs, and are consequently readily admitted as tenants
where the latter would be kept at arm's length. Of their origin
I can say nothing certain. They have the same story as the
Aroras, of their having been Rájputs who escaped the fury of Paras
Rám by stating that their caste was aur or "another." The Aroras are
often called Rokas in the east of the Punjab; yet I can hardly be-
lieve that the frank and stalwart Kor is of the same origin as the
Arora. The Amin men (who ars Chauháo Bachchhas by got) say that
they came from Sambhal in Murádábád; but this may only be in order
to connect theinselves with their neighbours the Chauhan* Rajputs, who
certainly came from there. But almost all the Rors alike seem to point
to Bádli in the Jhajjar tahsil of Rohtak as their immediate place of
origin, though some of them say they came from Rájputána. Their
social status is identicalt with that of Játs; and they practise karewa or
widow-marriage, though only, they shy, within the caste. Their sub-
divisions seem to be exceedingly numerous. A few of the largest are
the Sagwál, Maipla, Khichi and Jográn. The Arnbála Rors would
appear to be mostly Sagwal. The Rors of Pipli (Thánesar) are described
by Mr. Kensington as having a modified custom of chindavand. This
appears to be really a system by which brothers succeed their father
equally, but only uterino brothers inberit from a deceased brother, the
whole blood excluding the half.
RORA, ADE ARORA.-The Panjábi Dicty. (p. 973) gives the meanings, a hard
clod, a fragment of stone, a lump of gur, the name of a caste'.
Roshania.--From the earliest times of Islám there have existed sects
professing doctrines not inculcated in the Qurán, or even condemned
by it. These doctrines appear to have been from time to time revived
in Persia, and in Khorassán, which from the very first age of Islam
had been the fruitful parent of heresies: there appeared the Ravendis,
who taught the doctrines of the transmigration of souls aud the
Bucoessive incarnations of the Deity. With these were nssociated social
doctrines advocating community of women and the equai distribution
of property. In the middle of the 16th century there was in the Punjab
a revival of these doctrines, headed by Báyazid, an Angári Shaikh, who
was born at Jullundurf where descendants of his family still live.
The Chauhan legend admits the descent of the Ror of Amín, eto., from Rána Har Rai.
The Rájputs, however, say that they were originally Ods who dug the tanks at Thánesar.
Originally in many cases, if not in all, they held their lands as dependants of the Rajputs,
without much doubt.
+ Sir J. M. Douie says they rank below Játs and that their caste organisation is stronger
than that of the higher agricultural tribes, the punchuyut being still powerful.
Bazid or Báyazid was born about a year before Bábar overthrow the Afghán dynasty at
Panipat in 1526. His father Abdulla lived in Kaniguram in Waziristán, and his mothor's
family in Jullundur, but the farailies wore related, Káyazid's maternal grandfather and his
paternal great-grandfather being brothers. The rise of the Mughal power drove his
parents to seek refugo in Kaniguram. Eventually Abdulla divorced his mother and the
boy was neglected by his father and ill-treated by his step.mother. Thus he was driven to
sook instruction of an obscure kinsman, Shaikh Ismail, thereby deeply offending his
father, a relative of descendants and namesakes of Shaikh Bahá-ud.dín Zakaría. Báyazid
then became an itinerant horse.dealer, and at Kálinjar became a disciple of Mulla Sulaiman,
& malhid or Ismailian of ultra-Shía tendencies upon whose teaching be based the essential
doctrines of the sect he was destined to found.



836
The Roshanias.
Kalidher perrun the horia Khelmand child ar where facher.
After a troubled youth Bayazid settled in Kaniguram where he lived
the life of a hermit, dwelling in a cave, and devoting himself to religious
exercises. Here he evolved the eight precepts which be enjoined on his
followers. He assumed the title of Pir-i-Roshan, or 'Saint of the Light.'
His teaching, however, found no favour among the Wazírs, and
Báyazíd was attacked and wounded by his own father. Hardly was
bis wound healed than he fled to Nangrahár where he found a welcome
from Sultan Ahmail, the Mob mand chief. Later he found firm.sup.
porters among the Ghoria Khel, the Khalils and Muhammadžais who had
recently overrun the Peshawar plain of Hashtoagar. From his seat at
Kalidhor Báyazíd sent out followers op what were little better than ma.
rauding expeditions. These roused Muhammad Hákim's government
to action and Bayazid was arrested, taken to Kábul and coufronted
with the Ulama' of the court. Freed at their intercession, but not it
would seen without a heavy ransom,. Báyazid found a home in Tíráh.
The Pir-i-Roshan is.said to have expelled the Tíráhis from Tíráh
because they were suspected of backsliding from his tenets and intri-
guing with the Mughals. Having treacharously murdered 500 of them.
the remainder fed to Nangrahar and the Pir subsequently* invaded
that tract but was repulsed with great slaughter by Muhsin Khán,
governor of Kábul, at Baro which the Roshanias had sacked. Thencé
he reached a village in Kálápáni where he died.
After his death the sect languished. Its most active supporters
were the Afrídis of Tíráh, the Yusufzais having been re-converted to
orthodoxy, but in 1587 Akbar in person defeated Jalal-ud-din, the son
of Bazid, in an expedition against the Roshanias of Tiráh and the neigh-
bouring hills. Nevertheless in 1600, Jalál-ud-din, grandson of Roshan,
oblained possession, for a time, of Ghazni. In 1611, however, the
Roshanias, having caused a revolt at Kábul, were put down with great
slanochter and the sect died out, its tenets continuing to be professed
only by Bazíd's descendants in Tíráh and Kohát, and by some of the
Bangash and Orakzai Pathans. ..
In or about 1620 Mahábat Khán, governor of Kábul, massacred 300
Orakzai Afgháns, boping thereby to weaken the power of Ihdád, the
Roshania, grandson of Bayazid, and then despatched a large force
under Gbairat Khán into Tiráh. This force was overwhelmed at the
Sang Paja Pass (1619-20). Some six years later Ihdád took advautage
cf an Uzbeg invasion of Kábul to sally forth from Tíráh and harry the
country but on the Uzbegs' departure Muzaffar Khán, governor of
Kábul, turned on Indád who fled to the Lowaghar range. In 1626, he
was killed and his head sent from Bangash to Jahangir.t Abdul Qadir,
lie had been captured at Aghalah-Der in the Peshawar district by Muhsin Khán but
effected his escape.
+ Thdad was killed during the term of office of the Khwaja. Abul Hasan who was an-
pointed subahdár of Kabul in 1622. Ihdad's head was sent to Lahore and stuck on one of
the gateways. The family was thus descended :-
Bárazíd, Pír.i-Roshan, Ansári.
Shaikh Umar, Bayazid, and four other sons.
(and three other sopei
Ihdad, wife Alai
Abdul Qadir
Jalál-ud-Din,
Karam Dád,



337
800Afghám ngashát, he whole fathed Baghahati and
The Roshanias in Kurram.
bis son, and his beautiful wife Alai, who was beloved of all the Roshan-
ias, then went into Tíráh and thence attacked Pesháwar when Muzaffar
Khán had gone to Kábul on hearing of Jahaligír's death, which was
the siypal for a general risivg of the Afghán tribes. Pesháwár though
completely invested was relieved by Saíd Khán, the faujdir of
Bangash, and the Afgháns who submitted reluctantly to Abial Qadir's
leadership, were defeated with loss. Saíd Khán, now governor of
Kábul, induced Abdul Qadir to subinit, but the Mughals had to send
a force against his followers in Tíráh where the Afrídis and Orakzais
offered a stubborn resistance and their leaders only submitted when
granted lands near Pánípat. Operations were also undertaken in
Kurram.
The Roshanias in Burram.-The Turis of Paiwar are, or were &
century ago, Roshanias, and that sect once possessed considerable
power in Kurram as well as in Tíráh. At the time of Jahangir's death,
1627, Abdul Qadir, the son of Ihdád, was in the Karmán valley whence
he advanced into Tíráh. In 1637-8 the tribes about Baghzan had
lately re-called Karím Dád, son of Jalál-ud-din, with his disciples who
bad been driven out by the Mughals and compelled to take refuge in
the Mubáni country. From Baghzan the Roshanias advanced on
Tíráh which was disaffected to the Mughals. For the purpose of
reducing the Orakzais and Afrídis the súbahdár of Kábul, Muzaffar
Khán, assembled 15,000 Afghán levies, with the trops under Rájá
Jagat Singh, thinadár of the Bangashát, and other leaders, and 2,000
cavalry of his own contingent, placing the whole force under Muham-
mad Yakub, Kashmiri. But before this force reached Baghzan from
Kábul, the people had put to death a brother of Karam Dád Khan and
a brother of Azár Mír, Orakzai, The people of Lakan in Khost,
however, fed with Karím Dád Khán and his followers to their mountain
fastnesses and the Mughal force destroyed their villages. The winter
snows, however, soon compelled them to surrender Karím Dád with the
family and dependants and he was soon after, under orders from the
emperor, put to death at Pesháwar.
The family of Bazid itself, however, was not exterminated, for the
surviving suns of Jalál-ud-din received Mau Shamsábád near Agra in
jágír, through the influence of the Wazir of Shah Jahán, Sa'ad-uliah
Khán, who was himself, according to tradition, a disciple of Bazid.
But how far the doctrines of the sect survived is by no means clear :
that they have greatly influenced Muhammadan beliefs in these
Provinces appears certain, for a number of songs which commemorate
the mirueles of Shaikh Darwesh and other members of Pir Roshan's
family are still sung by faqirs in the Punjab, and in these songs
allusions are made to the Sayads of Bokhára on the one hand, and on
the other to the spiritual influence of the family on Sher Shah Saynd
Jalál.* It would, indeed, appear probable that the Rosbania herony
was a Shia development. The name of the sect, its persecution by
orthodox Islám, and its doctrines, all point to this conclusion, but the
doctrine of metem psychosis, which, According to Bellew, Bázíd oro.
fessed, is exceedingly common and may not be confioed to the Shias, .
It should, however, be noted that Raverty states t' at Bází i was a Súfi,
ovinces appearhaikh Darwesh in the Punjab anhe hand, and
* Legends of the Punjab, III, pp. 158-217 (p. 163 and p. 175).



338
Hotar-Russiwatt.
Pir bet Muhammpostle of Dood, and there
but, having been a disciple of Mulla Sulaiman, Jalandhari, he became
initiated into the tenets of the Jogis and so converted to the dootrine
of the metem psychosis, to which he added the dogma that the most
complete manifestations of the divinity were made in the persons of
holý men. Both these doctrines were, however, far older than the
Roshanias.
Bazid adopted the title of Pir Roshan or the Apostle of Light,
apparently in allusion to the light of Muhammad, but he was called
by his orthodox' opponents Pír Tárik or the Apostle of Darkness. He
laid aside the Qurán, taught that nothing existed save God, and that
no set form of worship, but only implicit obedience to his Prophet, was
required. He also preached communism of property,* and his followers
are said to have practised community of women.
ROTAR, see under Ránotra.
Rotu, a Jág clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Ronal, a clan of Játs with headquarters at Beholi in Rohtak.
RUBárá, fem. -1, the white-eyed duck: a tribe of Játs (Multáni).Panjabi
Dicty., p. 975.
RÁK, a clan, found in Shujábád tahsil, Multán distriot.
Rúknak, a class of Saniási faqirs.-Panjábi Dicty., p. 476.
Rúpnámi, a Hindu sect.
RúsI-WATT, or -BAFT, a rope-maker, a caste so employed: Panjabi Dicty.,
p.. 978: cf. Rassiwat at p. 48 supra, s.v. Mahtam.
* The custom of vesh or periodical redistribution of tribal lands is proubly alluded to
Though older than the Robbadia movement that custom may have been supported by it and
strengthened by Bázid's doctrines,



889
SABARWÁL, a family of agricultural Khatris found in Jhelum.
SÁBIR CAISHTI, gee Chishti.
SABRÁBÍ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
SÁBÚNGAR, soap-maker : see Teli.
SADDEKBEL, see under Isperka.
SADDOZAI, a clan of Patháng. By origin a branch of the Utmánzai by a
second wife of Utmán, they are practically separated from that tribe,
but with them hold the extreme east of Pesháwar on the right bank
of the Indus, lying to the west, while the Utmánzai lie to the east.
One, however, of its septs, the Khudu Khel, occupies the valleys be-
tween Chamla and the Gadún country. In Afghánistán the Saddozai
were supplanted by the BÁRAKZAI as the ruling family early in the 19th
century, but not before the Saddomnis had enfeoffed many families of
their own and other tribes in the province of Moltán. By degrees
these families, known as the MultánPathans, absorbed a good deal
of power, The fief of Shujábád remained for some time in the hands
of one of them, and ultimately, under the famous Nawab Muzaffar Khán
and Nawab Sarfaraz Khán, the Multán Saddozais set up for themselves
a kingdom which was for all purposes independent.** The family of
the Saddozai Nawabs is not now connected with Multán, but resides
mainls at Lahore. Saddozai families are, however, found in Baháwal.
pur and in Dera Ismail Khán. As an agricultural clan Saddozais are
also found in Montgomery.
SADBKB, a Kharral olan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Side, fem. -Ni, dinn. Sádhak, a practiser, a disciple of a faqir ; Panjabi
Dicty., pp. 982-8. According to Ibbetson sádh is properly nothing more
than the Hindu equivalent of the Mussalmán word pir, or rather sidh
applies oply to a Hindu devotee, while pir includes any Muhammadan
holy man. "But the word is especially applied to a set of Hindu Uni-
tarians who are chiefly found in the Upper Ganges.Jumpa dokb, from
Farrukhabad upwards. The sect was founded by one Bírbhán (or
Bírbár) Rome 200 years ago. The Sádh do not smoke, and affect great
personal cleanliness, and their religious ceremonies consist in eating
together. It is a sect rather than an order, and the Játs of a large
village in Karnál are Sadhs by sect, though Játs by carte. (See
Wilson's Hindu Sects, p. 227ff.). According to Maclagan the sect was
founded by one Udo Dás, one of the pupils of Rai Dár. Sir James
Douie's account of the seat runs:t “They own the whole of one
village, Zainpur Sádhán, and the half of another in pargana Indri, and
a few families are to be found in tahsil Piplí of Ambala. They are said
to be found also in Rohtak, to own two villages in Saharanpur, and to
.
..wwww
* See Maclagan, Multá a Gazetteer, 1901-02, pp. 48-58, for its history, and pp. 162.8,
* P, N, Q. 1., 8 1038.



840
Sadhana-Sádhu.
be especially numerous in Farrukhábád. They say they are in religion
neither Hindus nor Muhammadans, but followers of the Guru Udho
Dås, who was doubtless a reformer of the type of Kabír and Nának.
They worship no material object, pay no respect to the Ganges or
Jumna, have no idols or temples, and adore only the One God, under
the title of Sat or The True One.' The whole village community
-men, women and children-meets monthly on the day of the full
moon in a gurudwara, when bunís (the precepts of the sect) are recited.
Music is not allowed in their worship; they pay no respect to
Brahmans; and they do not employ them at their weddings or funerals.
At weddings the phera is presided over by a pancháyat of respectable
members of the brotherhood; they are boand to salute no one, their
Guru having taught them to pay this mark of respect to the Supreme
Being alone. Other Játs do not eat or intermarry with them. A mela
(assemblage) of the whole sect is held yearly. The place of meeting
is changed from time to time. This year it took place at Delhi. Some
80 years ago the grandfather of the present headman of Zainpur was
carried off by the Sikh chief of Kalsia, and had all his fingers burnt
off, because he refused to acknowledge that Nának was the true guru
(religious guide).”
The priests of the menial classes are often called Sádh, as the
Chamarwa Sádhs of the Chamárs, or the Charandasi Sádhs and the
Kabírbansi Sádhs of the Juláhas. To these must be added the DIWÁNA
Sádhs whose headquarters are at a place, apparently mythical, called
• Pir-pind,' and the NIRMALA Sádhus or Sådhs. Lyall also mentions
Sádhe among the Gaddis, but these would appear to be sádhus or
Gosains.
SADHÁNa, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Sadoir, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
SADENAPANTHI, a follower of a sect founded by Sadhna, a saint or bhagat,
who was born in Sehwan in Sind. He was a contemporary of Námdeo
and a butcher by trade, but he never killed animals himself, confining
himself to selling the flesh of those slaughtered by others. The sect
does not appear to be numerous now, and it is confined to persons who
follow the trade of butcher. Its tenets are obscure, but probably con-
sist in worshipping Sadhná as an incarnation of Vishnu.*
Sadko, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SADHRA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery: and,
as Hindus, in Ludhiana where their customs resemble those of the
Sanghera.
SIDRO, a monk or saint:t apparently synonymous with sádh (9.v.). The
term is applied to members of many Hindu orders and sects, especially
in the south-east Punjah. For instance, in Rohtak there are two sects
whose members are styled Sadhu. These are the Gharibdási and
Ghisa-panthi. The former were founded by Gharib Dás, a member of
Macauliffe, Sikh Religion, VI, p. 84. For a life of Sadhna, see pp. 84-8. His tomb is at
Sirhind.
† But to be distinguished from faqir : Karnál Gazetteer, p. 123. For sádhu = sáhu see
under Sábu.



:
Sådhmárgi-Sáfi.
341
a well-known family of Dhankar Játs, now resident. in Chhudani, a
village of tahsil Jhajjar, which had migrated shortly before his birth
from Karaantha in Rohtak tahsil. He was born in Sambat 1774 and
was noted for his piety and poetry. Himself illiterate, he dictated,
when about 23 years old, a book now known as Bábá Gharib Dásji kí
postak, or Gharib Dás kú Granth Sahib, which consists of some 7,000
verses of the celebrated Kabír, followed by 17,000 of his own. He
died in Sambat 1835, and over his remains a handsome samadh was
erected. Four mahınts have died since him and the fifth is now on the
gaddi. The office of mahant is hereditary in his family. Hitherto
the mahants have all been garhasti or married men, but it has
been decided that the present occupant of the office, who is an adopted
son of his predecessor, who had only daughters, shall remain
celibate. He is a mere lad and possibly the decision will yet be revised !
The professed Sadhus of the sect are celibate and wear red och re (geru)
coloured clothes. They differ from Kahírpanthis chiefly in abjuring
the use of tobacco and all narcotics. It is a tenet of the sect that
Kabír and Rám are identical-Rám men Rabír men kuchh antar nahin.
There is no difference between Rám and Kabír," Gharibdásis are
found in the Punjab as well as in Rohtak ; there are branch institutions
in a number of villages of the district. They practise cremation, and
not burial. A sorewhat similar sect found in Rohtak is that of the
Ghisapanthis. Ghísa belonged to the Meerut District and was canon.
ised on his death about 1860 A. D. His followers abstain from meat,
drugs, and intoxicants, and wear ochre-coloured clothes. They worship
Ishwar (God), and not idols, but sing songs in praise of Kabír. Thes
discredit the Vedas, Brahmans, and the cow. They do not perform the
phera ceremony at weddings. Their gurús are buried, though laymen
are burned. The sect is now making no progress.
SÁDHMÁRGI, said to be a branch of the Shwetambari Jains : cf. Sádhupanthi.
SÁDIUPANTHI, a group of the Jaius, of uncertain classification : Punjab
Census Rep., 1912, § 229. .
SÁBI, Sári, a tribe of doubtful. Pathán origin, vassals of the Mohmands :
at least th 'se east of Mitái a'd north of Kamáli, in particular the
Kandahári sections, are clans who hold their land by sufferance of that
tribe and are bound to pay tribute to the Khán of Lálpúra and entertain
passiog Mohmands, like the Mullagori.* According to Merk it is
almost certain that the Sáfis are converts to Islám from the Káfirs.
Their fanaticism may be due to the recent date of this change. And
the position of the tribe from Kohistan and Tagao to Bajaur, on the
confines of Káfiristán, the language spoken by them in Kashmung, and
the fact that they are certainly not Afgháns nor of the Hindki class,
testify to the correctness of this supposition. They are divided into
the four following clans :-
Kandahari ........ Sipáh, Kamál Khel, Mirza Khel and Amrohi.
Gurbuzi
Wader
... Shamsho Kor, Aba Khel, Madur Kor and Ghilzai Kor.
Masaud
.
* The Mullagoris of Tartara appear to be quite distinct from the Sáfis. Thoir clans are
ihe Tar Khel, Par Khel and Daulat Kbel.



842
Sagal-Sahi.
Raverty, however, only divides the Sábs into three khels, as above, but
omitting the Kandahári. He says they number nearly 20,000 families.
Some dwell in the hill tracts of Baur Kamar, but the majority dwell in
the valleys of Lamghán or Laghmin and Pioh, and in Kúnar and
Kámán." Those in Saur Kamar used to pay titbe to the chief of
Bajaur, but those of the mountainous tracts of Lamghán, Kúmar and
Kámán and of Pioh pay no tribute. Though not under any single
chief the Sáfis are strongly united and all three clans are partners in
each village and its cultivated lands to a greater or less extent. Con-
federates in war they are remarkable for energy and perseverance.
Tradition says that a Sáfi, aggrieved with the ruler of Bájaur, migrated
to Bádel, the first village wrested by the Safis from the Tor Káfrs.
Thence, joined by other bold spirits, he drove the Tor Káfirs out of
Pích. The Salis in 1738 A. D, suffered great cruelty at the hands of
Nadir Shah, in whose time they were a numerous and powerful tribe
located in the districts of Shah Makh, Cháríakár and other parts of the
province of Kábul, in retaliation for the part they had played during the
Persian king's investment of Kandahár and their attacks upon himp dur-
ing his march to Kábui. Left without support by the Mughal government
they submitted to Nadir Shah, but only to have their eyes torn out and
carried in maunds before the Persian monarch for inspection. These
facts, related in the Nádirnáma, appear to disprove the theory that the
Safis are of purely Kafir origin. According to the Ain-i-Akbari the
Safi had to furnish 85,000 men to the militia, but Raverty thought this
an error and proposed to read 300 horse and 5,000 fout instead. As
early as Akbar's time they had settled in Panjhir, an ancient township
mentioned in the Masálik-wa-Mamálik.
SAGAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SAGGI, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
SAQQo, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur,
BAGLA, a Muhammadan tribe of Ját status, found in the Montgomery tahsil
on the right bank of the Rávi near Idalwála; originally Rajputs, claim.
ing descent from the Rájá of Dháránagar, they say they migrated to
their present seats iu Akbar's time, but thoir privoipal villages were
founded under Muhammad Shah and Kamr Singh Nakkái.
SÁGŅý, an expounder of omens, Panjabi Dicty., p. 985.
Sagrí, the tribe of the KHATTAK Pathans mainly found in Shakardarra,
Kobát.
SÄHansí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. Probably SÁNSI.
SAĦÁRAN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Sáni, sumetimes pronounced Chhahi in Ludhiana. A Ját tribe which, like
the Sindhú, claims descent from a Solar Rajput who went to Ghazni
with Mahmúd, and returned to found the tribe, settling on the Rápi
pear Lahore. They are found in any numbers only in Gujrád and
Sialkot and in the latter district have two septs, Mutren descended



Sáhibzúda-Sahjdhári.
348
from Golai and Debru from Asi, the two sons of Bhán, son of Sáhí.*
Hindu Sáhis are said to avoid marriage with the Jajja and Sindhu,
and Muhammadan Sábis to avoid it with the latter tribe oply.
They have, in conmon with the Sindhu and Chíma of these parts, some
peculiar marriage customs, such as cutting a goat's ear and marking
their forebeads with the blood, making the bridegroom cut off a twig
of the jhand tree (Prosopis spicigera) and so forth ; and they, like most
of the tribes of the Sialkot District, worship the jhand tree. Widow
remarriage is permitted, but only with the husband's brother. If a
widow marry any one else she is outcasted.
The Sahi are also found as a Ját clan (agricultural) in Multán, Shah-
pur and Amritsar, and in Montgomery they are described as a clan of
the Kharrals, to which Mirza, the hero of the legend of Mirza and
Sabibáo, belonged.
SABIDZÁDA, a descendant of a mullah who gained a reputation for learning
or sanctity. The Sahibzadas of Jandol claim Arab descent.
SADDIÁRI, SIJADHÁRI, apparently fr. sahij, easy, gently' so easy.going or
conforming, as opposed to Kesdhári, the Sikhs who wear the kes, i. c.
do not cat the bair at all, una iefruin froni smoking tobacco. Gene.
rally speaking the Kendhári may be defined as followers of Guru Govind
Singh while the Sahjdhári inay be roughly equated with the NÁNAK-
PANTHI or followers of Gurú Nának. Recent movements in the Sikh
fold have tended to " l'aise the status of the Kesdhári Sikhs, so much so
that while formerly Kesdbáris and Sahjdháris of the same caste inter-
married without distinction, a Kesdhári will usually not give his daughter
to a Subjdhári now unless be takes the pahul, although he does not
mind myrı ying the daughter of a Sabjdhári. In other words, the Kes-
dháris are beginning to establish themselves as a hypergamous group."
On the other band : "the relatiods of Sikhs, whether Kesdháris or
Sahjdharis, with Hindus pure and simple are so close that it is im-
possible to draw a clear line of distinction. Even amongst the Kes-
dháris who are tbe followers of Gurú Gobind Singh, a large number
8.9. the Mánjha Játs in the Lahore aud Amritsar Districts.
wallow boys
to have their hair cut, up to about 15 years, when they take the pahul
(receive initiation) and begin to wear the kes, but all the time the boys
are as good Sikhs as the parents. Then in one and the same family.
one brother may be a Kesdbári, another a Sahjdbári ; and the third
while wearing the kes may be a Sarwaria who smokes the hukka. In
numerous cases the father is & Kesdhári, the son does not wear the
kes and the grandson is again initiated and becomes a follower of the
precepto of Gurú Gobind Singh. In an office of the N.-W. Railway.
there is an Arosa calling himself a Kesdhári Sikb, who weyi's the kes
* But the Bialkot pamphlet of 1866 gives an entirely different account. While it makes
them Buraj-bansi and carries their descent up to Rájá Rám Oband, it says that they came
from Ghazni with Mahmúd Sultáp and remained iu bis servico a long time during Akbar's
rojgn! Wazir took to agriculture, and fixed on Chak Dingai, about 14 miles from Lahore.
on the banks of the Rávi: he had 5 sons, tik., Chíma, Goráya, Saib, Sundoo (? Sindhú), and
Sabi : the issue of each formed two separate clans. The clans were called Mandeo and
Veru: the former holding 5 villages, the latter 18. They intermarry with the Baiw
Ghuoman and Chíma. They worship the jhand tree, and on marriage occasions, they slić
the ear of a ram; wiping the blood on the rim of the litter which conveys the bride. Chundą.
vand is the rule of inheritance in the clan.



344
Sahnsar-Sahrwardia.
but shaves his beard. His brothers are Sahjdháris. There are several
instances in which the wife of a Sahjdhári Sikh vows to make her first
son a Kesdhári. The younger sons remain Sahjdháris. A Kesdhári
marries the daughter of a Sahjdhári and the daughters of Kesd háris
marry Sahjdbáris. Indeed intermarriages between Kesdhári or Sahj-
dbári Sikhs and ordinary Hindus are still matters of every day occur.
rence, although the modern movement has succeeded to a considerable
extent in confining the followers of Gurú Gubind Singh in a water-tight
compartment, restricting intermarriage with non-Kesdháris and en-
forcing the initiation on all male descendants of Kesdháris. But to
this day, instances of Sahjdbári sons of Kesdhári fathers, particularly
in the educated community, are fairly numerous."-Punjab Census
Rep., 1912, $$ 215 and 216.
SAHNSAR, SAINSAR, a curious caste regarding which little information is
available. They are found in Hoshiarpur round Tánda and Dasuya, and
say that they were originally Bhatti Rájputs, but they may be an off-
shoot of the Mahtons or the Pakhiwáras. Another version is that in
other parts of the country they are called Hazára and that Sahansar
is a translation of that name (sahan= 1000 = hazár). If this is
correct they may be Hazáras and they are certainly Muhammadans.
But one tradition brings them from Pattehar, a place which is said to
be in Saharanpur By occupatiou they used to be weavers, but now they
make ropes, mats, etc., of grass, and more or coronets for weddings. Folk-
etymology would indeed derive Sahansár from sun, hemp' and sar or
sarkara, grass,' in woich they work. They are also called rassi-baț or
rope-makers. They usually intermarry, but can take the daughters of
lower tribes in marriage and give daughters in turn to other tribes.
SAROKA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Sahol, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.'
SÁHON, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SAHOTA, (1) one of the leading Ját tribes in Hosbiárpur. Its head-quarters
are at Garhdiwala, where it ranks as the second of the three Akbari Ját
families of the district. Its bead is styled chaudhri : (2) a horse-breed-
ing tribe in the same district, said to be connected with the Kanjars.
Şahoļa is defined to mean 'a young hare' in Panjabi Dicty., p. 989.
SAHRÁWAT, SAROT, a Ját tribe which claims to be descended from Sahra, a
son or grandson of Rájá Anangpál Túnwar. They are almost confined
to Dehli, Gurgaon, Rohtak, and the adjoining Pațiála territory, In
Robtak their settlements date from some 25 generations back.
SADRWARDIA.-One of the regular Muhammadan orders, founded by
Shahabuddin,* a native of the small town of Sahrward in Iraq near
Baghdad, and a contemporary of Abdul Qadir Jilání. The first to
establish this order in the Punjab was Babáuddin Zakaría (died 1565
A. D.), better known as Bahawal Haqg, the celebrated saint of Multán.t
The followers of this sect, according to the Census Report of 1881,
" worship sitting, chanting at short intervals and in measured tones
the word Alláhu, which is articulated with a suppressed breath and as
in Bosbooks or to the
* Also said to be followers of Hasan Básri : see p. 387 infra.
† A fuld account of Bahawal Haqq and his connection with the shrine of Hujra Shab Mob-
kam is given in Punjab Notes and (xc908, III, SS 592, 643and 732.



Sáhú-Saike.
345
if ejaculated by a powerful effort. The devotee often faints with the
exertion." It is stated that they carry out both the loud and the
suppressed methods of repeating the kalima, and that they preserve an
indifferent attitude on the question of musical services. They regard the
reading or repeating of the Qurán as an especially meritorious act. They
are a popular order in Afghánistán, and contain a number of learned
men. Their chief head-quarters in the Punjab are at the picturesque
shrine of Muhammad Ismail (Mián Waddal, which lies between Shali-
már and Mían Mír. The Jalális are an offshoot from this order.
SÁRÚ, (1) a term meaning ' gentle', as opposed to zamindár or low-borr, in
Jhelum. In the eastern parts of Ráwalpindi the use of the term is
similar. It depends entirely on the tribe. The poorest cooly belonging
to certain tribes would be recognised as a Sáhu: the richest zamindár
not belonging to one of these could not call himself so and would not
attempt to. The term has been explained as derived from asl so that
sáhu would mean a man of asl khándán or 'good family'. The Gak. ,
khars and Janjúas are pre-eminently Sáhu and all the tribes claiming to
be converted Rájputs call themselves so. The hill tribes, Dhund,
Dhaniál, Kethwal and Satti, also claim to be Sáhu. While the zamindár
almost always cultivates his own land, the Sáhu often does not, and
never if he can help it, but the majority are now compelled to do so by
their circumstances.* In Ludhiana it is applied to the Garewál Játs.t
Among the Rájputs of Karnál chaudhri is the title for chief, other pure
Rajputs being called sóú, and impure ones gárá. The story is, bow.
ever, that the gárú are the issue of slave girls of the royal palace at
Delhi,' and that sub-Gárás are created in the same way as the sub-
Pángarhs-see under Ranghar ;I (2) patient': a tribe of Játs, said
to be an offshoot of the Síáls, Panjabi Dicty., p. 989; (3) a Ját clan
(agricultural) found in Kabírwálá tahsil, Multán district. It had
already occupied the country round Tulamba when the Aín-j-Akbari
was compiled, and is reputed to be one of the four most ancient tribes
in that tract: see Khak. Also found in Montgomery.
SAÈWAL, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Saidh, Balochi, = Sayyid.
SAIKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
* Ráwalpindi Gazetteer 1893-4, p. 102. To the above tribes add the Johdras and Jasgams.
Sayyids also are Sábu. For the rights of sons by wives of Sábu status see the Customary
Law of the Ráwalpindi District, 1887, pp. 7, 31 and 32. Sons by wives of lower status
are often excluded from any share in the inheritance. Widows of non-Sáhu status also
get a lesser share, as a rule : ibid. p. 49.
+ In the east (of the United Provinces ?) the term is also said to be applied sarcastically
to Bánias : N. I. N. Q. V. § 466. The fem. form seems to bA SUÁNI, Bháb,' writes Proi.
D. R. Bhandarkar, 'is of course the same as sádhú.' and in later inscriptions we get either
title affixed or prefixed to the names of wealthy rerchants as in Vimala Shah. Sadhu Guda.
rája, etc. Monier-Williams' Dicty. gives for sárhu also the sense of 'merchant. usurer.
Sadhu and shah again are the same as sháhukár, and in popular belief a merchant is called
Sháh or Sháhukár only when be possesses coin of 84 kinds at least: Arch. Survey Rep.,
1907-8, p 206. This suggests that sáhu really means 'pure' and is therefore applied to
one of pure blood or unmixed descent.
I P.N. Q., I, § 707. The writer says the same process is found among the Qasáis or
butchers. His view is supported by a custom recorded by him of the Bánias. If a Bánia
marry a Bánjáni widow or any woman of another caste, he is out-casted and becomes a
Ghátta lit. cleft or broken. Gháttas intermarry. But if they in turn seek alien wives they
are driven out of the Ghátta sub-caste and form yet a third caste called Ghátta-Ká-Gbatta.
These sub-castes appear to be formed in the United Provinces, though there is said to be a
large community of Gháttas about Khattauli, one of the Punjab Railway stations,



846
Sain-Sakyapa.
SAIN, a tribe of Rajputs claiming descent from the Rajput prince, Lakhman
Sain, of Mandi where the dynasty bore the title of Sain. It appears to
be confined to Siálkt. It is said to give brides to the Münbás. They
settled in Sialkot tahsil under Jiú.
SAINI, SAYANÍ, the market gardener caste of the Hindus in the eastern sub.
montane districts, corresponding to the Máli of the Jamna zone and
the Arain or Bághwán of the rest of the Provinces. The Sainis, writes
Ibbetson, would appear to be only a sub-division of the Mális, and it
is probable that they are a Máli tribe : some of the higher tribes of the
same caste will not intermarry with them. In Jullundur the Sainis are
said to claim Rajput origin, but Purser says that, according to their
own account, they were originally Málig and lived principally in the
Mutira district. When Mahmúd of Ghazoi invaded India their an-
cestors came into Jullundur and settled down there, as they found the
land suitable for cultivation. They did such wonders with it that they
were called rnsáini, fr. rasái, skill' whence ' Saini. Admirable
cultivators they are surpassed by none in industry or ability. They do
more market-gardening than the Játs or even than the Aráins, and this
in addition to, not in place of ordinary farming. They live all along the
foot of the hills between the valleys of the Jamna and Ravi, but have
not extended further westward to the Chenab. They are fairly numer-
ous in Ambala. About 10 per cent. of them are Sikhs, and the rest
are Hindus. Some of their got designations correspond with those of
the Aráins.* They do not appear to have any large clans, except in
Hoshiarpur, but in Gurdaspur the Sálahrit is a fairly numerous got.
The principal gots in Jullundur are the Bádwal,' Bhanga, Bhela,
Bhundi, Bole, Cheran, Daule, Dheri, Ghalar, Giddhé, Jandhír, Kaloti,
Mulána, Hugge and Timbar. Of these the two italicised are also found
in Hoshiarpur and in that District other large clans are the Alagoi,
Badyál, Baráyat, Gaddi, Hamarti, Mangar and Pawan, The Sainis
probably rank a little higher than the Mális as they more often own
land or even whole villages and are less generally more market garden-
ers than the Mális. In Gurdaspur the Sainis hold the Paintla tract in
Shakargarh tu hail, while the Aráine are oumerous round Kálánaur
and Batála. Both are industrious and frugal in the extreme, but they
are exceedingly prolific and the excessive morcellement af their holdings
forces on them the system of petite culture for which they shew great
aptitude.
SAJRÁ, a Ját clan (Agricultural) found in Multán.
SAKERÁ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SAKYAPA, A Buddhist order named after their founder Sakya Kongma, and
sometimes incorrectly described as a Gelukpa sect. Nomipally celibates
they wear nothing but red. In Spiti, where they hold the Tangyut
monastery, they are chiefly distinguished by the fact that the cadets of
the four noble families have for many years been attached to that
community, and on one occasion-apparently during an interregnum-a
# And those that do correspond are not always names of other and dominant tribes.
+ Possibly identical in origin or meaning with Balabria, q. v.
a Ramsay calls the founder Phakspa Jamspal and it is said that there is an image of him
at the Ngor monastery. But this appears to confuse the founder with the Pandit P'Agspa-
sem infra,



Sálahah-Salahria.
347
L. de Milloué,t bored by a mixture of the Sakya (Saskya, Yelp
cadet became its abbot.* The present acting Nono' of Spiti, Cham(s)-
pa-Gya(m)tso was also a brother of this Order until he was called to
his secular office. The parent house of the Order is the Ngor monastery
at one day's march beyond Tashi Lanpo.
L. de Milloué,t however, gives a very different account of the sect.
He describes it as formed by a mixture of the Nyigmapa and Kádampa
doctrines and named after the monastery of Sakya Saskya, 'Yellow
Land'), where it was born and which was built in 1071 by Kontcho.
Gyelpo (Dkon-mc'og-rgyal-po) in the province of Tsang south-west of
Tashi-lhúppo. This sect, founded at the beginning of the 12th century
by the son of Konsho-Gjalpo, played a considerable part in the re-
ligious and political history of Tibet by the great knowledge and the
intrigues of its monks, its incessant disputes with those of the Radang
monastery and above all by the supremacy which it exercised for nearly
three centuries over the other Tibetan sects, thanks to the authority,
both spiritual and temporal, I with which it was invested in the person
of its superiors by the emperor Khúbilhaï in gratitude for the pro-
phecy of victory made to him some years before by the celebrated
Sakya, Pandit P’ágspa. Its cult, almost entirely borrowed from that
of the Nyigmapus, is principally addressed to the Tantric Yidams,
Kyedorje and Chaknadorjeg and to the tutelary demon Dorjepúrpa. Its
founder is regarded as an incarnation of the Bodhisattva Manjusri and
its special precepts are 16 in number:-(1) to reverence the Buddhas,
(2) practise the trne religion, (3) respect the learned, (4) honour one's
parents, (5) respect the superior classes and the old, (6) to be kind.
hearted and sincere towards one's friends, (71 to be useful to one's
neighbours, (8) to practise equality, impartiality, justice and right
under all circumstances, (9) to respect and imitate good men, (10) to
know how to use wealth, (11) to fulfil obligations, (12) not to cheat
over weights and measures, (13) to be impartial to all without jealousy
or envy, (14) not to listen to the advice of women, (15! to be affable in
speech and prudent in discourse, (16) to bave high principles and a
generous spirit.
The Sakyapa Lámas have counted among themselves several eminent
men, among others the celebrated historian of Buddhism, Táranáth.
They once had a reputation, well merited, it is said, for learning and
holiness, but they are now said to be lax in the observance of discip.
linary rules, not too severe in morals and inclined to drunkenness.
Their canon allows matrimony and the dignity of Grand Láma or
general superior of the sect is hereditary as are the headships of most
of their monasteries.
SÁLAHAD, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SALAHRIA, a tribe of Sombansi Rajputs who trace their descent from one
Rájá Saigal or Shal of fabulous antiquity, and from his descendant
Chandra Gupta. They say that their eponymous ancestor came from
the Deccan in the time of Sultán Mamdáh as commander of a force
* Rhripa (pronounced thripa), 'ope seated in a high place.'
† Annales du Musée Guimet, Tome xii me; Bod youl ou Tibet : Paris, 1906, pp. 183-5.
* In 1270.
& Sanskr. Vajrajáni.



848
The Salahrias.
sent to suppress the insurrection of Shuja* the Khokhar, and settled
at Sialkot; and that his descendants turned Musalmán in the time of
Bahlol Lodi. They are for the most part Muhammadan, but still
employ Brahmans, and do not marry within the tribe. They mark the
foreheads of the bride and bridegroom with goats' blood at their wed-
dings. Their head-quarters are in the eastern portion of Sialkot, but
they are also found in Gurdáspur and La hore. The Thákar returned
from Sialkot are for the most part Salahria, but many of the Sialkot
Salahria show themselves as Manhás and some as Bhatti. In Gurdaspur
a large number of the Salahria are shown also as Bágar or Bhagar
which is curious as salehr is said to mean 'low land,' like Bágar. - The
Saini bave a Sálabri got....
The History of Sialkot gives a different and more detailed account.
It traces the Salahria to Rájá Singal, a prince at the time of Afrasiyab,
whom the Rája propitiated with presents. It claims Chandra Gupta
as one of the family, but makes him contemporary with Alexander,
Rája Jaigopál opposed both Subuktigín and his son Mahmúd, but
after a battle lasting 18 days the Rájá's elephant fled and his army gave
way. The Rájá then placed his son Anangpál on the throne, and died.
Anangpál fled to the Deccan, but his descendants took service with the
emperors and Rájá Sakat Bikr was sent to suppress Shúja the Khokhar.
He then founded a village, named after his father, Rájá Sál, who was
also called Salheria, where his descendants became independent.
Under Bahlol Lodi Rájá Sambál (? Sambal) turned Muhammadan and
they were confirmed in their dignities ; but internecine feuds soon lost
them their independence and they sank to mere agriculturists.
Sambál.
Bhopál.
Dunhál.
Bhámi,
Sajju (in 4th
generation). Sháju,
(ancestor of the
Salbrias.)
Bálu.
Ganni, Jeo. Moju. Bhiru.
ancestor of
the Ganiáthas. Jewáthas. Majwáthas. Bhirwáthas.
The descendants of Rájá Chut Pál, also a descendant of Sambal, are
still Hindus.
The Salahria intermarry with the Surkaeahs, Milotrah, Kátil, Butah
and Guddeah Rájputs, and, if necessary, brides are still given to the
Jamwal, Sampál, Manhás and Jassoah clans. Mahárája Ranjit Singh
was advised by his pandits to marry Salabria brides as they would
bring him good fortune and he espoused three ladies of the tribe. One
of them committed sati with him. In Gurdaspur the Salahria rank as
Bahri : see under Rájput. They follow the rule of chundavand.
Quarrels about women are said to be frequent among them and the
fashion set by Ranjit Singh is still apparently followed for many
Salahria girls are said to be sold in Lahore and Amritsar.
* Shaikha is the usual form of his name.



Sálár--Sámil.
349
SÁLÁR, a section of the Jadúns in Hazára, formerly settled in the Mangal
tract, but since 1830 confined to the Rajoia plain: see Gadúo and
Hassanzai.
SALIKA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
SALÍMSHÁHI, or Shersháhi, a title assumed by the Bhattiáras, who would
pass as Pathans (like the Kunjras who assume the title of Nawab
Sábib) and add the title of Khán to their names.* Cf. p. 43 supra.
SALONE, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SALOTRÁ, a Muhammadan Jáy clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SALÓTHI, a sept of Brahmans, hereditary pádhas of Keonghal.
SÁMIL OR Sámal, a frontier faction : see Gár.
SAMAN, a Hindu Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SAMAND KHEL, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SAMATOGI, a class of devotees who marry and lead domestic lives : as opposed
to Nága, those devotees who are purely ascetic and practise seclusion.
Macauliffe speaks as if each of the four sects founded by Rámánand's
disciples were divided into Nágás and Samayogis : Sikh Religion, VI,
p. 105.
SAMDÁR, fr. sam, share : & co-sharer in cultivation, also called háli who
SOws the crop and tends it, while the owner of the land supplies the
plough, cattle and seed: Ráwalpindi Gazetteer, p. 134.
SAMDARÁNÍ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
SAMEJAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SÁMIL, a tribe of the Sandal Bár akin to the Bhattis, as the following
genealogy shows :-
Nauresh.
Bhatti.
Narpat (a faqir).
Gajpat.
Jaspat.
Rájá Salwán (Saliyahana),
Dúsar.
Mansur.
Mán.
4 clan (agriculultural) found Gazetteer, p.she land saphili who
Sel.
Jiúndan.
Acchal.
Jagpál.
Padam.
Bhine.
Pati.
Bacherai
Abar,
Bhagsin.
Mani.
Sámil.
* Punjab Census Rep., 1912, $ 586.



850
Sámitah-Sammá.
The Sámils marry mostly among themselves. They give daughters
to the Kharrals, but do not receive wives from them. The Bhattís of
Pindi Bhattián do not give daughters to the Sámils.
There are also said to be Sámils in the Kirána Bár, on the Rávi and
Nilí (Sutlej), at Tára on the Chenáb, and also in the direction of
Dera Gházi Khán. The Sámils of the Sandal Bár are said to have
· come from Multán.
SÁMITAB, a small tribe found in the Leiah tahsil of Mianwali. It claims
Rájput extraction and tells the following story of its origin : Rám
Chandar and Gonda adopted Islám under alá-ud-dín of Delhi and
assumed the names of Muharram and Variam respectively. The former
was appointed kárdár or intendant of Sindh and, with his brother,
came to that country, where he married the old kárdár's daughter;
but the people rose in revolt and made the son of their former kárdár,
Muhammad Akram, their intendant. Muharram and his people filed
but were overtaken and captured, thereby earning the contemptuous
name of Shamtia or Sámitah. Feuds ensued with the Balím and
Ghishkori, and later with the Siar Játs, who took the western half
of their lands, one Sayyid Faqiru settling down as a buffer between the
two tribes. At weddings they observe Hindu customs but do not
employ Brahmans, and the nikáh is read in the orthodox way.
Sammá, a tribe found in the Baháwalpur State when they are represented
by the following septs :-
i. Abreja.
ii. Khambra.
iü. Bangit (found in Kárdárís Khánpur and Sadiqábad),
į. Abrah* . iv. Jamra.
V. Abbal.
vi, Nangana.
į vii. Bappi.
ii. Sawentra.-(1) Sudr. (2) Silra. (8) Dandam.
iii. Nareja, descended from pure Sammás on both sides.
iv, Dhareja, )
Dhári, Sby Samma fathers, but by mothers of other tribes, (cf. dhi, daughter).
Warand, )
Unnar, descendants of Raja Lákhá.
viii.
Ujjan.
ix. Sahta,
Kala.
xi. Gori.
xii. Lekhá.
Ranúhja or Runjba. This sept claims to be of the Dáúdpotra tribe. They have a
sub-sept called Tarechri, I a wild group, cattle-breeders by occupation. Accord.
ing to some Ranúbja and Runjba are separate sopts.
xiv. Kaka.
XV. Káhá.
vi.
vii.
xiii.
* The Abrahs are also called Phal-potras or children of the fruit,' because they first in.
troduced agriculture into Sindh. Hence their motto:
Lakha lakh lutáiyo,
Karan bakhshe kror
Te Abrah bakhshe hal di or
· Lákhá (a Samma rája) gives lakhs, and Kararn krors of rupees, in charity
but Abrah gives but what he earns by the plough.'
+ The Sangi branch of the Sammes has a tradition that in ancient times the Sammás had
two grades, one comprising the 30 families of superior or genuine Sammás, the other 13
inferior septs who were wazirs of the daminás. To the latter belonged the Khohánras. No
cther sept of the Sammás bas however preserved such a tradition.
A mound so named in the Cholistán, near Patn Munára, may once have belonged to this
sept.



Sammeke Sangáh.
351
SAMMEKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SAMMI, a group of Máchhis, employed as fishermen, fishmongers, quail.
catchers, and poulterers. They are said to have come from Rori in
Sindh and are mostly foand in Lahore where they also make mats and
work as boatinen.
Samor, a Ját clar (agricultural) found in Maltán.
SAMRÁ, a Hindu Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery and Multán.
SAHRÁE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and in Ludhiána. In
the latter district they cut the jhand at weddings and play with the
twigs. The offerings are given to a Brahman. Their ancestor,
Joanda, came from Siálkot and his samadh is there. They cut the jandi
at weddings and the cutter is given either a shawl or a khes according
to one's means.
San, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SANDHAL, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Sanda, a tribe of Ját status found in the Multán district. They had already
nccupied the present mouth of the Ráví when the Aín-e-Akbari was
compiled.
SANDAH, SÁŅDAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán. Sanda is also
a branch of the Dhillon Játs.
SANDELAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SANDHAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Mailsi tahsil, Multán district.
SANDHAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SANDNE, (1) an Aráin, (2) a Hindu Kamboh clan (agricultural) both found
in Montgomery.
SAŅDaí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SANDO, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar, Montgomery and
Multán. The name appears to be a mere variant of Sindhu.
Sándí, a tribe of Ját descendants of Sándá, a Rájput of Bhatner and now
found in Sialkot.
Sandíla, a clan of Ját status, found in Multán. They claim to have
come from Delhi in the time of Shah Jahan. It is also described
as a Mubammadan Ját clan (agricultural) and as a Baloch clan
(agricultural) in Montgomery.
SANDRÁL, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
SANDRÁNá, an (agricultural clan found in Sháhpur. In Montgomery it is
described as a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural), but it appears to
be Hindu.*
SáŅDYE, (1) an Aráin, (2) a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SAŅGAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Sangás, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
* Montgomery Gazetteer, 1898.99, p, 90,



ngo, a we to be derivohaná, to s
352
Sange-Sani.
SANOF, a clan or got of the Lud (?) Játs, found in Hoshiárpur. * Cf.
Sanghe.
SANGERE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar. Cf. Sanghera.
SANGA, SÍNgh, a well-finder. But see under Tobá. Cf. also Senga. The
word appears to be derived from or connected with singhan (Panjabi
Dicty., p. 1057) and sungghaná, to smell (p. 1080).
SANGHE, a Hindu Ját tribe of Ferozepore akin to the Dhillon. It has what
appears to be a special custom at weddings in that after the bride's
advent, the bridegroom goes out with his parohit and fetches home a
branch of the pannu, a bush used for making brooms, which he plants at
his house and keeps watered for a year or six months in order that it
may remain green. In Hoshiarpur it is one of the principal Ját
may rest and kennu, a budes out wil weddin
tribes : main green. ale red for a 10
SÁNGDERA, a Ját tribe found in Ludhiána. They cut the jandi after a
wedding and play with the twigs like the Samrai. They offer a cow
or buffalo's milk first to their jațhera. Offerings are given to a Brahman
and the cutter of the jandián is paid according to one's means.
SÁNghi, a Ját tribe found in the Sangarh tahsil of Dera Gházi Kbán.
Like the Arwál Játs it follows Baloch custom in marriage, etc.
SANGHOWÁL, a sept of Rajputs descended from Lakhmi Chand, son of Sangar
Chand, 16th Rájá of Kahlúr.
SaŅgí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán and Amritsar.
SANGOKE, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SÁNGRAD, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SANGROTA, a Ját got which claims descent from a Chauhan Rajput who
killed a dacoit with a sengar or quarter-staff. It now holds villages
in Jind tahsil but is said to have migrated from Karnal.
SANGTARÁSH, styled Pathar-patore in Ambála, a stona-cutter or stone-
breaker
Sángwán, a tribe of Jáțs closely allied to the Sheoráns, 9. v. They hold 40
villages in pargana Dádri of Jind and are also found in Hissar and
Rohtak. In Jind they claim descent from Sarduha, a Rájput of Sarsu
Jangu. Sangu, son of Nainu, bis descendant, migrated from Ajmer
and founded villages in Jind. He became a Ját. With him came
Mahta a Godaria Brahman, a Jhanjaria Nai, & Khuſian Dúm, and a
Sahjlan Chamár, and these gots are still clients of the Sángwán,
who hold 57 villages in Dádri tahsil, 55 of these lying in the Sángwán
tappa. From this tribe are descended the Jakkhar and Kadan gots,
each of wbich holds 12 bás or villages in Rohtak, and also the Pahil,
Mánt and Kalkal gots. The Jakkhar got does not marry with the
Sángwán or Kadan gots, but the two latter may marry with each other.
Like the Phogát the Sángwán reverence the bhúmia at weddinge.
Sání, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
* P. N. Q. III, § 588.
+ But the Man are also saia to be allied to the Dallal, Desnál and Bowal: seg under
Dallál.



The Saniásis.
353
SANIÁSI. The term Saniásí is derived from the Sanskrit sannyás, 'abandon-
ment or resignation, and is applied to those who having passed through
the Bánparasth stage of life and attained the age of 75 years renounce
the world and are cared for by others. Such a sanyási wears bhagwa-
or salmon-colonred clothes, but he need don no janeo and wear no*
choti. The process by which the term came to be applied to an order
of religious mendicants is readily to be understood, if obscure. Possibly
the Sanyásís, as an order, are older than the Brahminical institution of
sannyás as the fourth and last stage of life.
The Saniásís often trace their order to Swámí Ditátre, the Muní
Dattatreya of Sanskrit works, who is sometimes said to have been
Shankar Acharya's precursor, and all Saniásís, it is said, receive the
mantra in Ditátre's name. The story of the contest between this Muní
and Gurú Gorakhnáth would make the former much later, writes
Mr. Maclagan, than Shankar Acharya. Briefly, the history of the
Saniásís is as follows :-
The Saniásí sect (to use the only term available) decayed in the
Buddhist period, and then split up into various sub-sects with hetero.
dox creeds. This led, after the fall of Buddhism, to the reforms of
Shankar Acharya, who had four disciples, each of whom founded
maths or schools, which again split up into numerous branches,
Shankara Acharya himself founding the principal school :-
B.
FOUNDER.
SCHOOL
BRANCHES OR COLLEGES.*
Shankar Achárva. Sumer Math, in the centre
A.
of India,
( 1, Tírath ... 1. Bản.
1. Sarúpa Acharya ... Sárada Math in the West ...
est . 1 2. Ashram 2. Aran.
11. Ban
Tírath,
%. Balbhadra Budhiman Govardhan Math in the East
Aranya
Asram.
. (Padmau)
(1.. Girí
Girí.
3. Naurotka Acharya Joshí Math in the North ... 2Parbat 2. Puri.
(Tarnaka or Tank).
1(3. Ságar
3. Bharthí.
(1. Girt
1. Ban.
4. Prithidhára Achárya Sangirí Math in the South... 2. Puri
2. Aran.
(Prithvi or Prithodar)
(3. Bhártí ... 3. Tírath.
The Brahmachári, however, appears to be the teacher of the elements
of gyán, who instructed the pupils of the Achárya.
The Saniásí sub-orders or pádas are given as follows, and are said
to be ten in number, yet eleven names are specified, viz. :-
1. Giri or 1. Gir (? Sháh). 1 6. Parbat (hill) or 6. Bargat.
2. Purí or 2. Purí.
7. Sagar
or 7. Rukar.
3. Bhartí or3. Bártí.
8. Tirath (temple) or 8. Sukar.
4. Ban OT: 4. Ban.
or 9. Dandi.
5. Arn or 5. Arn.
( 10. Sarassati or 10. Surastí.
11. Jatti or 11. Jattí.
Of these the first two (Girí and Purí) are not celibate. The other
nine, it is said, do not marry, yet the members of the Ashram sub-order.
in which sub-order the Jatti, Dandí, Bargat and Rukar are included
9. Ashram
or
10. Surastí.
* In lieu of the Sárada and Govardhan Maths Mr. Maclagan gives :-
1. Narágani Math ...: Param. 2, Brahmachári
""? 2. Asram. i
1. Saraswati.
2. Dandi,



354
The Saniásis.
(sic) are described as marrying and living permanently in cities. The
same informant further notes that there are in each sub-order two
sections, one celibate, the other not. Again the use of meat and
spirituous liquor is forbidden to Nos. 8, 9 and 10 (Tírath, Ashram
and Surassatí) above, but in the other orders also many abstain.
These ten pádas (each of which is called Dasnám) are also said to
include : 1, the Sarswatí, Bhártí and Purí, three military branches,* 2,
the Girí, Parbat and Ságar, three branches famed for their knowledge
of the Vedanta: The tenth páda places its faith in jap, counting or
telling its beads, and in gyán, or knowledge.t
It is impossible to say precisely what the names of the ten pádas
really are. Out of 8 lists of them Mr. Maclagan found that all con-
tained four-viz., the Girí, Purí, Aran and Bhárthí, but for the
remaining 6 the lists gave one or other of the following names :-
Astáwar, Jatí, Bodla, Dandi, Anandi, Dat, Achára), Kar, Nirambh,
or Parí. To these may be added Kháki, Dagbar, Sokhaſ in Miánwali. I
According to some accounts only eight of the podas are true Saniásís,
the Bharthís--who always appear as one of the ten pádas being really
Jogis, and the Dandís Vaishnavás.
The Saniásís are also cross-divided into four classes, or degrees (of
varying sanctity, it would seem), or way of life. These are :
i. Kavichar 1 ii. Hang.
ii. Bhodak
iv. Param Hans.
i. Kavichars, who have renounced the world and live in forests,
occupied in religious contemplation and worship. They do not go
about and beg, but live on the alms of passers-by.
ii. Bhodaks are itinerant mendicants, who collect alms in kind
(never in cash), and never remain for more than three days in one
place.
iii. Hans are versed in the Vedanta philosophy. Remaining in one
place they live on charity. Believing firmly in the identity of Nature
and Soul' they scrupulously follow the path prescribed by the Yoga
system.
iv. The Param Hans are Yogís who have attained perfect beatitude
and are merged in the Supreme, having command over life and death.
The Hans and Param Hans are opposed to idolatry, though some of
them worship Deví. They repeat the name of Parmeshwar with every
-
* Other accounts say that only the Nirambh, Asram and Saraswatí are allowed to wear
or use arms.
of Just as the guiding principle of caste organization is cross-division, so the key to the
degrees and classes of a religious sect or order like that of the Saniásis is unquestionably
to be found in the operation of that principle. The Sanyásis resembled the Nágas in that
at one period they became a militant body as well as a religious order, or combined both
characters. In 1763 they plundered Dacca and are described as “professing to belong
to a religious fraternity.” In the correspondence of Warren Hastings they are frequently
mentioned under the pame of Sanyásis or Fakírs, and he speaks of them as still a pest in
1773 and 1774.
# Around Moch are found Dádu-khel, Páíkhel and Mári Saniásís, while lower groups
called Rukar, Súkar, Kúkar and Bhukar act as Mahá-Brahmans to the Saniásis and accep
their alms at funerals,



The orthodox Saniási.
355
breath-whence their designation. The title is applied more especially
to the bigher grades of the order, particularly to the Dandí Saniásís.
Such is the popular account. A more scientific one is given in $146
of the Punjab Census Rep., 1912- Sanyási,' writes P. Hari Kishen
Kaul, is an order originally prescribed for the Brahmans alone and is
the only name given for ascetics in Manu or earlier works. Four
classes of Sanyásis are recognized by the Samritis,* viz., Kutichak,
Bahúdak, Hansa and Parmahansa. The classification is based upon
the degree of vairágya (aversion) which precedes the renunciation.
Vairágya is said to be of three kinds, (1) manda (dull) which is only
temporary and is caused by the loss of son, wife, home, etc. ; (2) tibra
(acute) when the desire is not to have sons, wife, wealth, etc., in this
or the future life, and (3) tibratar (intense) in which the person wishes
never to be reborn in any loka (world). Sanyás must not be taken in
mand vairágya : tóbra vairágya entitles a man to initiation as Kutíchak,
Bahúdak or Hansa. The Parmahansa type of sanyás can only be
taken when the vairágya is tibratar. A person may enter this degree
direct or after having entered one or the other of the three lower
degrees. Kutíchaks and Bahúdaks are tridandis, i.e., carry three staffs,
which represent the vák-dand, mano.dand, and karma-dand, i.e., vows
to control the speech, mind and action. A Bahúdak is he who can
travel. He is not supposed to stick to one place, hut a Tridandi who
is unable to undertake journeys becomes a Kutíchak, and is allowed
to beg from the house of his son or relatives without taking any in-
terest in them. The Hansa and Farmahansa Sanyáses are ekdandis
(i.e., carry only one staff). The Hansa has only tíbra vairágya, but
wishes to obtain gyán (knowledge of the Supreme) in Brahmaloka.
Farmahansas are of two kinds (1) Vividusha, those who desire gyán
here, and (2) Gyánván, those who have attained it. These kinds of
sanyás are not now in vogue, at all events in the Punjab.'
Below these are two new orders called Okhar and Phukar to which
Kánets, Játs, Jhíwars, Bahtis and Gribastas or house-holders are admit-
ted. These perform menial duties and act as the Achárjes of the
Saniásís.
Yet another grouping of the order is based upon the degree of their
spiritual attainments or rather on their functions within the order, and
these groups are called after the three gunas or philosophical qualities,
(i) the Rajoguní who are principals of religious houses (akháras) and
live in the world, (ii) the Tamoguni, ascetics who live on charity,
begging for the day's wants, and (iii) the Satoguni, who do not even
beg, but trust to Heaven-and their neighbours.
Other groupings, probably popular, are (i) Vidwat, or learned and (ii)
Veodásha or learners. Again we hear of Dandí Saniásís-further sub-
divided into ek-dandi, do-dandi and tri-dandi, or those who carry 1, 2 or
3 sticks to signify that they have subdued the body, the mind or speech
or two or all of these. Others again are designated Kotichas because
they live in huts (kotís), and others Bahudak, because they drink daily
from many a well or spring and are thus for ever wandering.
* See Páráshar Smiriti and Hárita Smiriti,



356
The Saniási order.
“Besides the Dandis or Dashanámis, there are three peculiar classes
of Sanyasis, viz., (1) Atur Sangási, who embraces Sanyás just before
death, (2) Mánas Sanyási, who renunciates the world inwardly but
never adopts any outward sign of the order, and (3) Ant Sanyasi, who
on adopting Sanyás sits in one place and determines to end his life in
meditation by not taking any food or drink.”
In order of precedence, and placed by Shankar Achárya himself
above all classes, stands the sampradaya. “Shankráchárya organized
the Sanyásís into a regular religious order and established four mathas
(central institutions) where alone a person could be initiated into the
áshrama. He recognized the ten names (dashaníma) of Giri, Puri,
Bharati, Parvat, Ságara, Van, Aranya, Saraswati, Tirtha and Ashrama
for them, and distributed the titles over the four mathas. But he
conferred the privilege of bearing the staff (danda) on only 3 of the
10 classes, viz., on the Tirtha, Ashrama, Saraswati and half of the
Bharati. The other Sanyásis are called Dashanámi or Goswami. The
- Dandi Sanyásis enjoy the highest esteem amongst the Hindus, for it is
said that, Dandagrahana mátrenn naro náráyanah bhavet. (By the
mere fact of holding the staff, i.e. by being initiated to the degree of
Dandi, the man becomes God). The four mathas of Shankrácharya
were established at the four ends of India,* one of his disciples being
placed in charge of each. The preceptor now presiding at each
matha is termed Shankráchárya. An explanation of each detail would
take up too much space. The Kedar Matha is not in existence, but
the Shankrácháryas of the other three mdthas are trying to revive it.
Only Brahmans are initiated at the Shár ada (Dwarka) and Shringeri
Mathas, while the Govardhana Matha will admit persons belonging to
the other varnas as well. Full discipline of the order is enforced
only at the mathas, but they have several branches where persons
wishing to enter the order are admitted into its folds."I
on
* The peculiarities of the mathas are-
Brahmá.
Dishá, or Matha, or Khshetra, or Acharya, 1st charya, Devta.
Devta, Devi,
direction. institution. locality. preceptor. order of god. goddess.
celibacy.
Dast . Goverdhan. Purushottam. Hastamálak. Prakáshak. Jagannath. Vimalá
South ... Shringeri. Rámeshwar. Sureshwar, Chetan.. Adivaráha. Kámákbyá.
West .... Sháradá. Dwárika. Pádmapád. Sarúp. Siddheshwar. Bhadra Kili.
North. ... Syotir. : Kedár. Shrotak. Aranda. Nárayana. Punyagiri.
Disha,
Tirtha, cr Veda, subject Mahávákya, Gan, Nám, title.
or direction. holy spot. of study. aphorism. epithet.
East
... Mahodadhi Rigveda. . Prajnádam Vágvar. Van & Aranya
(Ocean).
Brabma.
South ... Tung Bhadrá. Yajurveda. Aham Brahm- Várivar. Puri, Bharati &
asmi.
Saraswati.
West ... Gomati. Sámveda. Tattwamasi. Kitvar. Tirtha and Ash.
ram.
North ... Alaknanda. Atharva.veda. Ayamátmá. Anandvar. Giri, Parbat and
Ságar.
+ The distinction is similar to the assignment of the four Vedas to different regions, thus
the Rig Veda, with its Chhandas and Brahmnas and its god Agni is assigned to the Earth,
the Yaiur Veda with its god Váyuh, to the antariksha (firmament), the Sáma Veda, with its
god Surya to heaven and the Atharva Veda, with its gods the Rishis to the 10 directions,
Punjab Census Rep., 1913.



357
mental of peculiar tendencia pst of Sanyasis has
Saniási groups.
The Sápiásís have also cross-divisions or classes, based on their
various observances or customs. These are:-
i. Bhog-bár, who are indifferent to all earthly things, save those
necessary to sustain life;
ii. Ket-bár, who attempt to oat only a very small quantity of food;
iii. Anand-bár, who are averse to begging and live on spontaneous
alms;
iv. Bhúr-bár, who live on forest products, grass and ashes (?) pound-
ed, exclusively ; .
v. Kanshi-bár, who have no desires and live on air and water. in
continual beatitude.
Pandit Hari Kishen Kaul, C.I.E., thus describes the Sanyasi
groups :-
“ A number of minor groups of Sanyásis have been formed in conse-
quence of peculiar tendencies of individuals, not based upon the funda-
mental principles of the order, e.g., (1) Avadhúta* (Tántric) who are of
four kinds :-la) Brahmávadhúta, (b) Shaivávadhúta, (c) Bhaktávadhúta
and (d) Hansávadhúta. Bhaktávadhúta are divided into () Púrna
called Parmahansa and (ii) Apúrna known as Paribrájaka.† Some
divide Avadhúta Sangásis iuto Grihastha and Udásin. f (2) Nángas
who go about naked. (3) Alikhya, called (a) Bhairon Jholidhári ;
(6) Gunesh Jholidhári ; (c) Káli Jholidhári, according to the names of
their jholis or begging bags. (4) Dangali who are regular traders in
rudraksha rosaries and similar accessories of worship. (5), Aghori
or Sarbhangi, who will eat anything, are considered very degraded,
and are not touched. They are becoming rare now. (6) Urdhabahu,
who keep one arm up until it gets atrophied and stiffens to that posi-
tion. (7) Akáshmukhi, who always keep looking upwards. (8) Nakhí,
who grow their nails. (9) Sthadeshwari, who always keep standing
and never sit or lie, down. (10) Urdhamukhi, who tie themselves up
to a tren by their legs at the time of their practice. (11) Panchadhúni
or Panchagni, who practise austerities with four fires kindled around
them and the fifth fre of the sun shining above. (12) Tyág Sanyási,
those who do not beg but eat whatever is given to them without the
asking. (13) Maunabrati, wbo maintain rigid silence. (14) Jalashayi,
who practise austerities sitting in water. (15) Jaladhárásparshr, whose
heads are continuously sprinkled with water, when they are in medita-
tion. (16) Kadalingi, who engirdle their waiste with an iron plate in
place of the usual waistband and langot. (17) Phaláhári, who live on
fruits alone. (18) Dudhádhári, who live on milk alone,--and so on.
- The last but not the least important class of Sanyasis are the
Grihastis or Gharbáris (the married ascetics) who are a contradiction
in terms. The class is, of course, much looked down upon and is not
very pumerous. At the same time there are female Sanyásis called
Avadhútnis. The number of real female ascetics is very small, but
quite a large number of female beggars go about in the garb of Sádhnis
and ofteper than not, describe themselves as Sanyásans."
* See Nirvana tantra Chap. XIV; Mahanirvana tantra, Chaps. VIII and XIV.
4 Prantoshiri Dhrita Mahanirvana tantra.
* Mundamála tantra.



358
Saniási rites.
The castes from which the Saniásís 'are recruited.
· Some of the Saniásís, in order to oppose the Muhammadan invasions,
endeavoured to found a militant branch of their order, but this was
opposed by other Saniásís on the ground that the order was spiritual,
not secular. The Sangirí Math, however, at last agreed that, if Ráj.
puts were admitted into the order, Saniásís might bear arms. [This
seems to imply that Saniásís were formerly not recruited from Rájputs.
It may be that originally, they were only recruited from Brahmaps, as
is indeed expressly stated by P. Hari Kishen Kaul). All the other
Maths concurred. Later on Vaigyás were also admitted and managed
the finances and commissariat of the Order. Lastly, all restrictions
were removed and even men of impure castes admitted, but they cannot
rise to the positions to which Brahmans and Rájputs may rice, and the
higher castes never eat food cooked by them, nor may they leara the
Vedas. In other words, caste restrictions hold good after admission
into the order.
Hence, it would seem, arose two classes within the order, the Nágá
Nangá or naked, militant members, and the Tapaswís or devotees who
practise the most severe austerities, sleeping on an iron bed, etc. But
this classification does not cover the whole order: see infra under ashes.
Thus, in theory, Saniásís are recruited froin all castes, but in practice
the order is mainly made up of Brahmans* and Khatrís, and according
to some the true Saniási will not eat in the houses of any other castes
save these two.
Saniásís are recruited from two distinot classes, (1) those who, owing
to misfortune, abandon the world, and (2) those who deliberately elect
to follow the devotee's life. The former are not regularly initiated,
but simply go to a Saniásí, offer him Re. 1.4, receive certain mantras
from him after feasting 5 or 7 persons, and then maintain themselves
by begging. The latter are however formally initiated.
Initiation.--Having obtained the consent of his relatives and trans-
ferred to them all his property, the would-be Saniási makes the round
of his village and goes to a distance of one kos towards the north. He
also worships in all the temples and sbrines of his village, praying for
aid to serve God throughout his life.
He then starts on a pilgrimage in search of a gurú, who should be a
Brahman, eminent for spiritual learning. The Brahman dissuades him,
pointing out the hardships of the life and so on, but, if he persists, he is
advised to acquire knowledge. To this end he goes to an Acharya who
teaches him the Vedanta, briefly and gives him a mantra containing
the name of Parmeshwar, which he must repeat day and night. He
has also to make a pilgrimage, taking only a kaminąıl or water-pot
and a jholi (a wallet or loose cloth). After this he returns to his gurú
who satisfies himself as to his fitness and initiates him, thus:-
i. His head is entirely shaved,t and the sacred thread removed.
* Five of the pádas, the Saraswatí, Acháraj, Aran, Ban and Anand are said to be
recruited from Brahmans alone; while the other five are open to the public.
† Saniásís either wear all their hair or shave it all. They do not wear the scalp-Icok



Saniási ritual.
359
Next he must offew and to show thahe three gods, Br
ii. He offers pindas to ancestors, so as to fulól his obligations to
them.
iii. He must then offer tarpan or ablutions and performs three jajnas,
viz., the Shradh, Deva and Rishi karms.
iv. Next he must offer pindas to himself, as being dead to the world,
and perform the bají hawan to show that he has severed all connection
with his relatives. He then worships the three gods, Brahma, Vishnú
and Shiva, and also the sun and the goddesses, and then accounts
himself to be one of the gods. Lastly, the gurú gives him a mantra and
advises him to join a math, sampradia, etc.
Such is the popular version, but Pandit Hari Kishen Kaul gives the
orthodox rites :-" The ceremonies of initiation into sanyás have a
deep significance. When a person has made up his mind to enter the
order, he signifies his intention to the head of an institution of San-
yásis and having received the permission goes through the following
ceremonies :-(1) The first thing he has to do is to perform the
shradha (obsequies) of all his pitras (ancestors, etc.). (2) If a khsht.
ágni, i.e., one who practises agnihotra (fire sacrifice), he performs the
prájápatya ishti and if a niragni, i.e., non-agnihotr, then the birja
havan, according to Vedic rites; and gives away all that he possesses
except a kopín (loin-cloth), danda (staff) and jalpátra (water vessel).
(3) He then bas his beard, moustaches and head shaved, keeping
only the shikhá (scalp lock). This is called riundan. (4) The next
stop is to perform átma shrádha, i.e, his own after-death rites, pre-
suming himself to be dead. (5) He then addresses himself to the
Sun and recites a mantra, purporting to give up the desire for sons,
wealth and higher life and resolving that no living being shall receive
any injury froni him. (6) His shikhá is then cut off. He enters
water (the sea or a river) with his shikhá and yagyopavit in hand and
throws both away, resolving :- I am no body's and no one is mine.'
After that he recites the Preshamantra, whereby he adopts sanyás in
the presence and with the testimony of the three lokás (regions) and
renounces the world. (7) On emerging from the water, he starts
naked to the north for tapa (austerity). (8) The guru stops him,
makes him put on the kopin, gives him the danda and the jalpátra,
kept out of the initiate's personal property and advises him to stay
there and begin to learn what he can. He is gradually persuaded to
put on other covering as well."
Ritual.-The Saniásís worship Shiva, in the ordinary way, and
Shakti, with a special secret ritual called márag. These rites are con.
ducted by the elect and are often costly, They are held at night, and
last some 9 days. Outsiders are carefully excluded, only initiates being
admitted. The initiates are closely bound together by the bond of
their common beliefs and have certain pass-words by which they re.
cognise one another.
Discipline :-" The marks of a true Sanyási are :-Kapálam brikisha
múláni, kuchailam asahayatá samatá chaiva sarvasmin, etadmu ktasya
lakshanam.* An earthen pot (for drinking water), the roots of trees
(for food), coarse vesture, total solitude, equanimity towards all, this
* Manų-VI, 44.



360
sitting a nyási id not covering
osition.in
Saniási usages.
is the sign of one freed.' Some of the rules of practice to be observed
by a Sanyási are :-(1) One cloth round the waist above the knees
and below the navel and another one over the shoulders; with these
two coverings should a Sanyási go out begging. (2) He shall eat
only one meal (in 24 hours). (3) He shall live outside inhabited
quarters. (4) He shall beg from seven and not more than seven
houses (except in the case of a Kutichak). . (5) He shall not stay too
long in one place (the Kutichak excepted). (6) He shall sleep on the
ground. (7) He shall not falute any one, nor praise or speak ill of
anybody. (8) He shall bow only to Sanyasis of a higher order or of
longer standing, and (9), he may not cover himself with a cloth except
of salmon colour. The Sanyási is not cremated but his dead body is
carried out in a sitting posture with the face open and buried in the
same position. The shrádha having already been performed by the
Sanyási himself, no after-death rites are necessary."*
Ashes. It is a sacred duty to smear ashes on the body, but only the
Nágás and Tapaswís smear the whole body, other Saniásís only mark-
ing the tri pundarík with ashes on the forehead.
Rosaricn.-As Shiva himself wears a rosary of rudráksh seeds, each
Saniásí does the saine. Each berry has several lines on it called
mukhs, and a berry with 1 or 11 mukhs is of special sanctity, each
mukh having a mystic significance.
t
Those Saniásís who visit the shrine of Hinglaj wear rosaries of
thumrat getting them as token from the temples of Devi.
Ceremonial prohibitions. As a Saniásí performs his own shrádh, and
offers pindas to himself he is regarded as dead, and so no Brahman,
Rájput or Vaishya will eat food cooked by him, drink at his hands or
smoke with him. For the same reason no true Saniásí wears the
sacred thread.
There are further prohibitions within the order. Thus the other
sub-orders do not eat, etc., with the Okhars or Phukars and the original
caste distinctions of the members are retained within the order, as
noted above.
Death ceremonies.-Saniásís like Jogís make a dying person sit
in an erect position, a wooden frame (vairágan) being placed under his
arms to prevent his falling back. The corpse, along with the bairágan,
* This para, also is reprinted from P, Hari Kishen Kuul's Census Rep., § 148.
+ The mukhs signify :-
i. Param Brahma Param átmá, i.e. He who created the world Himself wore this mukh.
2. Mabadeo and Párvatí, who first wore it.
3. Máya, as it is worn by the goddess.
4. The mukh which was offered to the four Vedas and Brahma.
5. That which was offered to the five Pándús.
6. That which was given to the six Darshan yogis, viz. :-Yogi, Jangam, Soora, Saniásí,
Darwesh and Brahman.
7. That which was offered to all the gods.
8. That which was offered to the Nau Náth yogis. These yogis are as follows :--Okar
(Onkár) Náth, Udái, sát, Santokb, Gaje Bhab, Chaurangi, Machhandar, Mast and Gorakh
Náths.
9. The mukh which was given to Das Nám Saniásí (alluded to above).
10. That which was placed on the jatá or matted hair of Mahá Rudra or Mabá Deo,
I said to be the dried fruit or seed of a tree. They resemble manka beads,



Saniká-Sanjogi.
361
is buried in this posture in a samádh, bhang and a hollowed gourd
being placed therein by the side of the body.* The Saniásis bury
their dead facing East, or North-East for this is 'homewards,' where.
as the Jogis appear to bury their dead facing due East.t
After this, salt and spices are thrown into the grave to hasten putre-
faction. The deceased's clothes and bedding are given to the Okhars
and Phükars of the order, and on a day between the 13th and 40th
after death, or even within 6 months or a year, his disciple performs
yajna, giving presents to Okhars and Phúkars as other Hindús do to
the Achári. This is called bhandára, and is confined to the wealthy
or influential members of the order. Poor Saniásís are merely buried,
and their property quickly given away. Over the graves of pious
men or mahants of large means, mandirs or samádhs are erected, and in
these lamps are kept alight and daily worship offered.
Lastly P. Hari Kishen Kaul regards the Jogis as a branch of the
Saniásis and says :-"Jogi is a corruption of Yogi, a term applied
origipally to the Sanyásis well advanced in the practice of yogábhyás.
They are really a branch of Sany asis, the order having been founded
by Gurú Machhandar (Matsyendra) Náth and Gorakh Nath Sanyásis,
who were devoted to the practice of Yoga and possessed great super-
natural power. Hatha yoga is the special study of the Sanyásis, and
they are called Yogis when they attain a certain degree of efficiency
in the practice. The followers of Guru Gorakh Náth are absorbed
more in the Yoga practices than in the study of the Vedas and other
religious literature, but between a real good Jogi and a Yogi Sanyasi
there is not much difference, except perhaps that the former wears the
mudra (rings) in his ears. The Jogis worship Bhairon, the most fear-
ful form of Shiva. Like all other sub-divisions of religious schools,
however, the Jogis have stuck to the details more thän to the principles
and got sub-divided into numerous groups. The main divisions are:--
Darshani or Kanpátá, who wear the mudra (and are known as Náthaj
and Aughar, who do not. Then there are Gúdar, Súkhar, Rúkhar,
Bhúkhar, Kúkar and Ukhar, as well as Thikarnáth, who carry a broken
clay pot for alms, the Kanipás (snake charmers), Bhartriharis (follow:
ers of Bhartrihari), Shringihar, Durihar, etc. There are also Jogins
or Joginis, i.e, females admitted into the Jogi order."
As a rule, the Saniásís are of a better class than the Jogís, and their
morality is of a higher order, but scandals about their enticing away
wives of rich Hindús are said to be not infrequent, though generally
hushed up
Saníká, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
SANJOGI, fem. -AN, 'one that effects a union.'-Panjabi Dicty., p. 1009.
Cf. Samayogi.
* The body is not burnt, because it is already dead-at initiation. Fancifully, too, it is said
to have been already burnt with spiritual wisdom, and if it were burnt all its spiritual
knowledge would be burnt with it.
† P. N. Q. II, § 127.
Styled Gorakhpanthi. A valuable account of Gorakhnáth is given by Sir George
Grierson in the Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, Vol. 6, p. 328.



the Abstricts routin Ludhaimer, whose tribe,
862
Sankhalan-Sansi.
SANKBALAN, a Ját got which claims Chauhán Rájput origin. It held a
viilage in Rohtak, where in consequence of some success gained over
the Muhammadans, who objected to the sounding of the sankh or
conch-shell, it acquired the title of Sankhalan. It is found in small
numbers in villages of Jind tahsil. Cf. the Sonkhla Rajputs at p. 285,
supra.
SÁNMORÁNAH, a Ját clau (agricultural) found in Maltán.
SÁNOND, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multáo.
SanPÁL, (1) a Rájput clan : (2) a Muhammadan Ját clan (both agricultural),
found in Montgomery.
Sángi, Sáonsi, Sánsı.--(1). A criminal tribe. The Sánsís are the vagrants of
the centre of the Punjab, as the Aheris are of its south-eastern portions.
They are most numerous in the Districts round Lahore and Amritsar
and are also found in considerable numbers in Ludhiana, Karnál, and
Gujrát. They trace their origin from Márwár and Ajmer, where they
are still very numerous. They are essentially a wandering tribe,
seldom or never settling for long in any one place.* They are great
hunters, catching and eating all sorts of wild animals, both clean and
unclean, and eating carrion. They keep sheep, goats, pigs, and donkeys,
work in grass and straw and reeds, and beg; and their women very
commonly dance and sing and prostitute themselves. They have some
curious connection with the Ját tribes of the Central Punjab, to most
of whom they are the hereditary genealogists or bardst; and even in
Rájputána they commonly call themselves bhart or 'bards.' They are
said also tu act as genealogists to the Dogars of Ferozepur, the Rajputs
of Hoshiarpur and Jullundur, and the Sodbis of Anandpur. About
11 per cent. are returned as Mussalmúns and a very few as Sikhs.
The rest are Hindús, but they are of course outcastes. I They trace
their descent from one Sans Mal of Bhartpur whom they still revere
as their Guru, and are said to worship his patron saint under the name
of Malang Shah. Their marriage ceremouy is peculiar, the bride being
covered by a basket on which the bridegroom sits while the nuptial rites
are being performed. They are divided into two great tribes, Kálka
and Málka, which do pot intermarry. $ They bave a dialect peculiar
to themselves ; and their women are especially depraved.
The Sánsis are the most criminal class in the Punjab ; and they are
registered under the Criminal Tribes Act in nine districts. Still, though
This is the case still, but a good many 8ánsis now appear to be settling down in
villages and even in towns. There was a large colony of them near Ferozepur which lived
ondor the protection of the Muhammadan Ját and Pathán cultivators there and supplied
watchmen, coolies and the like to the town, but it fell under suspicion of crime. The Bá gri
Sánsis aro more gypsy.like in their habits than those of the northern Punjab as they
always live in huts or tents and move with larger encampments, accompanied by their
families and a host of doukeys, dogs and fowls.
+ The Virk, Kahlon, Goráya, Dhillon, Varaich, Bhular, Her, Aulakh, Sekhon, Boparai,
and even the Randhawa and Butar Játs are said to be special patrons of the Sánsis, 28 aro
the Chibh, Kátil and Salehria Rájputs, in Siálkoţ. Bhart appears to be an error in trang-
cription for bhat: see notes on pp. 366 and 369 infra.
À Sáusis probably affect the creed of the village in which they are harbouroi. The Sikh
Sánsis wear the kes, but do not enrol themselves among the Mazbis.
& So Ibbetson, but Mr. H. L. Williams in his valuable monograph on the Sansis doubts
the correctness of the statement and with reason. The Kálkamlia is a BAURIA group:
Vol II, p. 70, supra.



Sánsi origins.
863
the whole caste is probably open to suspicion of petty pilfering, they are
by no means always professional thieves.* The Punjab Government
wrote in 1881: “ Their habits vary greatly in different localities. A
generation ago they were not considered a criminal class at Lahore,
where they kept up the genealogies of the Ját land-holders and worked
as agricultural labourers. In Gurdáspur, on the other hand, they are
notorious as the worst of criminals.” Where they are professional
criminals they are determined and fearless, and commit burglary and
highway robbery, though their gaugs are seldom large. The thieving
Sánsis are said to admit any caste to their fraternity on payment, except
Dhedhs and Mihngs ; and the man so admitted becomes to all intents
and purposes a Sánsi.
It would perhaps be more accurate to say that the Sánsis should be
classified thus : (1) the settled Sánsis, who are subject to the Criminal
Tribes Act, but who confine themselves to petty crime committed near
their own villages or in neighbouring districts, and (2) the nomad
Sánsis who have two main branches, (a) the Birtwán and (b) the puro
nomads and vagabonds. The latter are often called rehluwâlás by
villagers because their women sing rehlus or ditties and dance, but
they are probably the most criminal of all the Sánsis and their customs
are more primitive, for while other Sánsis burn or bury their dead the
real vagrants expose them in the jungle. The Birtwán doubtless derive
their name from birt, an allowance inade them by their Ját patrons
in Hoshiarpur (and doubtless elsewhere). These Sánsis are said to
styly their vagabond brethren Kíkan or Bheri-kutt but they inter-
marry with them freely and meet them at the annual festivals, so their
innocence of crime is rather uncertain. The Birtwán also profess not
to eat cow or buffalo flesh and the settled Sánsis claim still greater
purity for they say they eat kachhi only from the highest castes.
Various legends describe the origins of the Sansí caste. In Siálkog
it is said that once a Rájá of the Punjab expelled his daughter from
his city. Wandering in the wastes she gave birth to Sánsí, who
became a noted freebooter and had two sons, Baindu and Máhlá, from
whom are descended the 23 Sánsí gots.
Sialkot.
Gujrát.
Sehju.
Ghogbar.
Suja.
Lodi?
Sarwani.
Sbambír,
Sarwáni,
Khokbar.
Bagaria.
Sakru.
Seru.
Shamir.
Nandu.
Khushaliwal.
Gawala.
Jairam.
Biddu.
Chetuwál.
Nandu.
Khánu.
Lodi.
Gil.
Bhelad (? ra). Hiba and Ugi.
The gots descended from Máhlá are:-
Shera.
Haibawál.
Singewál.
Khánowál,
Massowál.
Tatwal
Batnawal.
Sundarwál.
Mihunwal,
Kewalwal.
Piddewal.
inter
in als als,
is
* Thus in Sháhpur the Sansis are not a particularly criminal tribe, thoug' they have no
fixed abodes in that District and are often found encamped in wasto places where they
capture and eat jungle vermin of all sorts. In this District they have a primitive religion
of their own, not unlike that of the Chuhșas, but they have been largely affected by Islamic
ideas, and many style themselves Sháfis from an idea that the Imán Shifi authorized the
eating of animals considered unclean by orthodox Muhammadans.
Said to mean sheep-killer'-- because these Sánsis when they steal a sheep stranglo it
instantly to prevent its bleating.



364
Sánsi origins.
But in Gajrát the Sansís claim descent from Rájá Sahns Mal, a
nomad of the Lakhi Jangal.* From Mahlá, his eldest son, sprang the
12 Sánsí gots, while Bhidú, his second son, had 11 sons, from whom
are descended the Kikans and Bhedkuts. Sahns Mal, Máhlá and
Bhidu are all propitiated as deified ancestors prone to exert an evil
influence on the descendant who incura their displeasure. Bhalad's
descendants are the wizards of the Sansís and they wear a long lock
of hair on one side of the head. This look is never cat. Bhalad's
descendants are employed to cast out evil spirits; and they are
welcomed at weddings but do not appear to take any special part in
them, though a fee of one rupee is paid them, as their mere presence
wards off evil spirits.
According to an anonymous writert the Sánsis were sospected, just
after the annexation of the Punjab, of being affiliated to the Mazhabi
Tbags, but the fact was never proved.
According to the Jhang version the Sansis are of Panwar Rájput
origin and are chiefly found scattered over Western Rajputana. They
are descendants of one Sansmál, whose wife was barren, but obtained
from a faqir a promise of offspring on condition that she should beg
from Hindus and Mussalmans alike. She then bore Beda, three years
later Malá, and lastly a daughter. Sansmal was excommunicated for
begging, and his son Beda followed his father's calling, but Málá took
to grazing cattle. One day Beda wished to cut a stick, bat as he had
no knife Malá cut it. The brothers then quarrelled over the stick,
whereapon one Dhingania, a Nat of the Jharia tribe, intervened and
decided that Málá should pay his brother 5 pice for the stick.I
Sangmal's daughter eloped with Dhingania, and her parents refused
to receive her, but relented on his agreeing to furnish Jharia brides to
Beda and Málá. In addition to their 23 sons the two brothers had
several daughters, but Dhingania's 13 sons also founded 13 gotras,
so that there are in all 36 Sánsí gots. This version makes. Beda's
eldest son Harrar and Málá's Sangah and says that the Sánsís of the
Punjab are mainly descended from these two sons. $ Beda's and
Malá's descendants intermarry.
sr eloped. This agreeing tens the the ended 13 grotere
* In Lahore Sahns Mal is reported to be a Rájá of the highlands of Central India,
who was deposed and banished for leprosy.
The Gujrát Sánsis make Sahns Mal's mother a princess whose father ruled the Lakhi
Jangal. One day, while in a boat, she saw a flower floating down a stream, she caught it as
it passed, inhaled its perfume and conceived a son. Her father drove her forth but,
protected by a faqir, she gave birth to Sabns Mal in the Jangal.
* A legend current in Sialkot says that a Rájput girl became pregnant, and so her parents
banished her. She gave birth to a son in the jungle and brought him up on wild fruits.
He was called Sáns Balli (of powerful breath), lived in the wild and plundered wayfarers.
His descendants followed the same calling.
† In P. N. Q. II, § 593.
Yet another account makes the sensis descendants of shábpuri, queen of the wandering
spirits, who won Indra's favour by her dancing and became by him the mother of Bins
Mal. P. N. Q. II, § 593.
I The point of the story is not apparent. Probably, it explains some peculiarity in the
relationship of Mala's descendants to those of Beda..
$ In Rájputána, it is noted, the Sansia families are known by the names of their women,
but in the Punjab they are known to each other (? i.e. among themselves, not publicly or
openly) as descendants of such and such a grandfather.



Bánsi clans,
365
In Rohtak the Sánsis are also known as Kanjar-Sánsis, or
Kanjars simply, but they claim to be called Bháton. These Kanjars
have an occupational group called khasuala because they live by
selling khas grass and making brushes. According to their account
Sáns Mal had two sons Malá and Bhaendú* who married their
own sisters. Sans Mal was unfortunate that when he sank a well for
irrigation it yielded blood instead of water, and the grain sown by him
produced dhák trees and ak or madár plants instead of cereals. Sans
Mal was thus expiating sins committed in a former life, but he wor-
shipped Bhagwan and obtained forgiveness, with permission to live
by begging. He was bidden to make a drum and to accept from the
first man he met whatever was given to him. When he beat his
drum a Chuhra appeared and gave him a snake to eat, and his
descendants therefore still eat snakes. Bhagwan then gave Sáns Mal
leave to hunt for game. In and about Delhi the Sánsis have five
mahals, of which Gandála and Bilonwála are criminal, while the
Kanjar-Sánsis are not. But the Kanjar-Sánsi are also said to be dis-
tinct from the 13 following groups, each of which is called Kanjar
with its group name affixed :-Bhaton, Banjára; Bauria, Gandhála,
Gúár, Jullád, Kákrá, Nath Sapala, Qalandar, Sikligar, Singhewála,
Udh, and Khaswala, which last has seven sub-divisions, viz., Athwár,
Bhagat, Ghillat, Hansam, Mallia, Sonda and Sonrá. The Khaswala
affect the goddess as Káli Mái, and Guga Pír, while the other Sansi or
Kadjar tribes only worship the Pír. Yet another Kanjar tribe appears
to be called Laungá. The Kanjar-Bauria disputes are all decided by
a panchúyat and rarely taken into court. The confusion of this account
probably reproduces with fidelity the contradictory accounts given by
the heterogeneous Kanjars or Sánsis themselves.
Mr. H. L. Williams of the Punjab Police gives the following as the
six families or clans most frequently found in the Punjab. The Sánsis
hold in the rainy season an annual festival in which there is some
element of religion though its exact nature is uncertain. Intertribal
and personal disputes are all settled at it and marriages arranged and
celebrated. The places at which each clan assembles is noted against
its dame :-
1. Mahlas at Mahla near Dbarmkot and at Guru Har Sahai in
Ferozepore.
2. Arhar, at Pakpattan in Montgomery.
3.
.. Pír Sakhi Sultán at Nigaha, Jawalamukhi in
Bidų ..
Kángra, Bibrian in Bíkáner, Phalaudbi in Jai-
salmer, and other places in the United Provinces.
6. Tetla ...) .
Other septs, mainly of the Birtwáns, are more rarely seen in the
Punjab.
In Jind the Sánsis have two territorial groups, Desi and Bágri, which,
it is said, do not intermarry,'add in that State their gots aro:-
Sidhu.
Dhindse.
Kalyane.
Bharwal,
Kbará.
Ghusar.
Jhonjh.
Nábal,
Punia.
Mathu.
Sábsar.
* Clearly the Boda of the forogoing account



386
Sánsi religion.
whose bar's time est-time, roer any other to some Ja
The Sánsis of Gujranwala and Gujrát are Muhammadans as are
a few in Siálkoţ; but to the north, in Jammu, and south, in Lahore,
Amritsar, Gurdáspur, they are Hindus.
In Gujrát the Sánsis are especially attached to the Waraich Játs,
whose founder, Chaudhri Jhetu, brought them to the District, apparently
in Akbar's time. Sánsis keep the Waraich pedigrees and visit their
houses at harrest-time, reciting the pedigrees and soliciting dues.
They do not appear to render any other service to the clan. In Jind
also they are said to be the genealogists to some Ját tribes.*
Organisation.-The Sánsis are much under the influence of their
aged women and the traditions cherished by them are a great obstacle
to the reclamation of the tribe. Women whose sons have been im.
prisoned, died in jail or executed are said to boast of the fact. Next
in influence to these beldames are the hereditary mukhtárs or leaders
who correspond in some degree to the gypsy kings of the Scottish
marches of a century ago. There are at least two families of these
mukhtárs and to one of them most of the headmen of the Sansi kots in
Sialkot belong, but members of it are also found in Ferozepur and
the neighbouring native States. The mukhtúr at Malla bas or had a
thán or chapel at which weekly sabhals were held on Saturdays, Saturn
being auspicious to burglars. These gatherings were attended by the
most criminal of the neighbouring Sánsis to sacrifice goats to Devi,
divide booty and plan fresh crimes. Here too gambling and drinking
formed part of the regalar rites.
Religion.---The worship of the Sánsig as ascertained at the Census of
1911 in the eastern Punjab is as follows:- They say Rám Rám morn-
ing and evening, and worship Gugá Pir. They cook rice in honour of
Jưáláji or some other goddess (Kálká) on the 2nd of Mágh sudi, and
promise offerings to Kálká, Jwala or Sitala for the fulfilment of their
desires. At the birth of a child, they remain in a state of impurity for
10 days. On the 10th day the dasúthan ceremony is performed, which
consists of a general cleaning up of the house, the performance of
Havan by the priest, for the purification of the child and mother. The
girls of the same got are fed on the 3rd or 10th day and black sugar
is distributed on the birth of a son. For 11 months (40 days) tho
mother of a baby is not allowed to cook, as she is not considered alto-
gether clean. After 11 months, a feast is held and the daughters and
sisters with their sons, who are treated like Brahmans, are fed on
sweet rice. The household is then considered to be free of all impurity.
The head of a boy is shaved when he is 2 months old. As regards
the death ceremonies, the dead body is carried on an arthi-wooden
bier-or a chárpai and is cremated. The kapál kriyá (i.e., the ceremony
of breaking the skull) is duly performed. The phul (burnt bones) are
picked up on the 3rd day and the persons who carried the dead body
are fed on sweet rice. The mourning lasts only three days, Kiryá
karam (after-death rite) is sometimes performed like other Hindus,
* The Sánsis in Jind are lágis of the Chubras, acting as their Mírásis and bháts, or
bards, beating drums and reciting their genealogies once or twice a year as well as at
weddings and funerals, in return for their lágs or dues, as they are their lågis. They are
inferior to the Chuhſas and eat their leavings, which the latter would not do, but they do
not eat dead animals as the Chuhfas do and they burn their dead, while the Chubpas hury
them. They are superior to the Kanjars,



Sánsi usages.
367
although the Acháraj is not invited and the ordinary Brahman offi-
ciates. Earthen pitchers full of water are placed on dasa gátra, and
gaudán is performed if possible (i.e., a cow is given a way to some
Sádhú). Virgins are also fed. The bones are thrown into the Ganges
or in some river or pond wbich may be within reach. The son has his
head shaved. Children up to 6 years are buried. On the apniversary
of a person's death, the brotherhood is fed on puláo and meat.*
The betrothal ceremony consists of a visit from the boy's father to
the girl's house and the presentation of a rupee with some rice to the
girl and the distribution of sweets, and a corresponding visit from the
girl's father to the boy's house and the presentation of a rupee and a
little rice to the boy. The date of the marriage is fixed in consultation
with the priest (Brahman). The marriage procession consists of the
bridegroom and some four or five men, who are entertained by the
bride's father. The marriage ceremonies are simple though in con-
formity with Brahmanical rites. Seven pheras (rounds) aro taken
round the fire and mantrás from the Vedas are recited. The father
gives such clothing and utensils to his daughter in dowry, as he can
afford. If all these rites are strictly observed by the Sánsis it is inn-
possible, as P. Hari Kishen Kaul observes, to call them non-Hindus.
All Sánsis are said to worship the sword and so an oath sworu on a
talwar is popularly said to be binding on a Sánsi, but this may be a
fiction set going by the Sánsis for their own ends. In Siálkoț, however,
it is probably true to say that po Sánsi will ever take a false oath on
the sword. If he is asked to place his hand on its hilt, he will not
touch it or pick it up if he is speaking falsely. He will only do so if
he is telling the truth.
Whenever a dispule arises between Sánsis, the parties call a gather-
ing of their brotherhoods and the appointed chiefs of the brotherhood.
They lay their case before this assembly and submit to the decision
given by the chiefs. The man heid to be at fault is punished with a
dand (a fine imposed by the brotherhood), its amount being fixed by
the chiefs. If the parties object to the decision and each still declares
himself to be in the right, another custom, called paun bhutti,
is observed. Each party gives a rupee to the chiefs who send for two
divers. A bamboo is planted in a well and the divers are sent down
into it. They dive into the water, and the man wbose diver comes to
the surface first is deemed to be false and the one whose diver comes
up last, is considered to be true. Their belief is that water will
pot allow a false man to remain below its surface. This decision
is final.
Fatha Shahíd has a mári or shrine on an ancient mound in a
Brahman village a little north of Malla io Sialkot. It is in the form of
* A writer in P. N Q. I, $ 955 suggests that the Gídias are a branch of the Sansis. These
appear to be the Gidris, of Vol. II, p. 299 supra, who closely resemble the Sánsis. He also
asks if the Bhangis are in any way priests or spiritual advisors of the Gidias, and says 'they
undoubtedly assist and protect them.' But as far as known the Bhangis or Sarbhangis are
not priests of the Sánsis, though the latter appear to have some connection with the Chuhļas,
as they said to intermarry with a class of Chuhļas, called Barela, who are found in Lahore.
The Barela may be connected in turn with the BABAR.
The Sánsis undoubtedly intermarry with the BANGÁLIS (II, p. 56, supra), but their best
known septs are Banli, Gharo, Lodar, Ma(n)dahár, Qalandar, Teli and Kharechar; whereas
those of the Sánsis (in addition to those named in the text) aro Chauhan, Khagi, Pandir,
Gahlot and Sam(b)bar,



868
Sánsi dialeci.
a cupola and contaios a nicho with a rude image of Devi. Fatha was
one of the mukhtárs of Malla and while standing sentinel during a
burglary was killed by his sister's son or husband in the confusion
caused by an alarm. So he is reverenced as a shahid or martyr. Be-
fore setting out on a thieving or begging expedition the Sánsis make
offerings at the shrine and the Brahmans say that Sánsis of both sexes
assemble at intervals at the mound and celebrate by night rites in
which drinking and gambling play a conspicuous part. Betrothals and
other contracts are also made at it, but there appears to be no regular
incumbent.
At Othian, a village in Daská thána in that District, are tbe shrines
of Hem* and Toto, two Sánsis, who lived in the time of Rája Ranjit
Singb. Their father's name was Shunaki. They gave up plundering,
became faqirs (ascetics) and devoted themselves to God. Their prayers
were accepted and their prophecies always came true, so the Sánsis
put great faith in them. Both died at Othian and the Sápsis built
tombs to them there.
At Tatli, a village in Kámoki thána of Gujráowála is the shrine of
Mái Lakhi, a Sánsi virgin, who renounced the world and remained
chaste. She lived as an ascetic in the jungle and there she died. The
Sansis worship at her tomb.
It is also claimed that Bábá Malang Shah was a Sánsi. A son of
Básu Sánsi, he lived in the jungle long ago as a pious faqir whose
prayers were accepted by God. He died at Sáránki in thána Sambriál
and his tomb there was built by the Sánsis who worship at it.
No Sánsi ever takes a false oath in any case on the name of any of
these paints, and will go to jail rather than take such an oath.
Whenever Sánsi's cow or buffalo calves, he takos its milk or the ghi
made from it to one of those shrines and pours it into a hole made in
the tomb for that purpose ; so that dogs, crows, etc., may feed on it
Language.-Sánsis have a peculiar guttural accept. The linguistic
interest of the Sápsis,' writes the Revd. T. Grabame Bailey, t 'is
paramount, Being criminals they conceal their language with
scrupulous and extraordinary care. Many are the stories they tell
of Paojábis and Europeans, who atterupting to become conversant
with their speech, relinquished the project in despair, being baffled at
the unforeseen maguitude of the task they had undertaken. Such
stories are, needless to say, exaggerations. The Sánsis' Dialect may be
subdivided into two, the main dialect and the criminal variation,
While the former will certainly repay time spent on it by students of
language, the chief interest lies undoubtedly in the latter. Here we
have the remarkable phenomenon of a dialect which owes its origin to
deliberate fabrication for the purpose of aiding and abetting crime.
Sánsis themselves are unaware of its source ; yet in the presence of
strangers they unconsciously use a dialect which is not a natural
* Apparently also known as Hetam. The Sánsis are also said to affect Rámdeo, the
legendary Rájput progenitor of the Baurias (II, p. 73, supra), Jambhu, Kukla and Bidh Bina
of whom the last-named was 4th in descent from Bánsmal. Attention to a godling called
Mián (probably Gúga) secures immunity from snake bite.
t Bee his article on the Sansi Dialect in J. A. 8. B., LXX, Pt. I, 1, 1901, p. 7.



Sánsi argot.
889
growth but a conscious manufacture. So much has this become now
part of themselves that Sánsis from any district in the Punjab will
speak the same dialect and be ignorant of the fact that what they call
their language is originally a conscious imposture, a deliberate fraud
a carefully laid plot to keep in natural darkness deeds which would
not bear the light. :
The main dialect is used by all Sánsis, both children and adults, in
ordinary conversation. It closely resembles Panjábí, though sometimes
more like Urdú, and if spoken with a clear and deliberate enunciation,
might be partially understood by a Panjabi. The criminal variation is
absolutely uniotelligible except to the initiated. Even Sánsi children
understand it very imperfectly. It is used in speaking in the presence
of alieps. The fact, above alluded to, that the Sansi dialect resembles
sometimes Panjabi and sometimes Urdú, is worthy of attention. The
1st and 2nd pers. pron. give a good example of this. The singular is
closely allied to Panjabi, but the plural is even more closely allied to
Urdú. All Sánsis can speak Panjabi, but do 80 with an accent and
intonation peculiar to themselves.
Main Dialect.--In pronunciation the vowel sounds are the same as
in Panjábi. Consonants vary only in so far as they extend the use of the
gutturally pronounced aspirates. In Panjábí initial bh, gh, jh, dh, dh,
have a pronunciation entirely distinct from that which they receive in
Urdú. In Sánsi we find in addition to these mh and nb, of mhára=
hamárá, and nhárázsárá (criminal dialect), cf. Panjábi nherni. This
peculiar guttural sound is traceable, as in Panjabi, in vowels, but here
no rule can be laid down. Experience alone will bring accoracy. The
grammar greatly resembles Panjábi and Urdú.
Criminal variation. This is a thought out and deliberate attempt
of sur passing interest, to disguise the ordinary dialect. Sánsis call it
Farsí, Persian,' and many really believe that it is connected with
Persian. Of course this is erroneous. One of the chief difficulties in
deciphering (so to speak) the Sánsi dialect is the existence of these two
varieties side by side. The criminal variety is marked by two distinct
features, (1) a number of words not found in the other, (2) a series of
Bemi-systematic changes of already existing words. These changes
vary, the same word being sometimes changed, sometimes unchanged,
sometimes changed in one way, sometimes changed in another. Sub-
joined is a list of the principal changes.
s changed to n, náb=sáb (sáhib); nat=sat, soven.
nh, nhárázsáró, all.
n, núchno=púchna, ask ; naist=paisa.
nh, nhitta=phittá (abuse).
nh, nhi--bhi=phir, then, etc.
ch, Chattú=Bhattú*=a 8ánsi ; chatánt=bhatáni, woman.
jh, jhúkhá=bhúkhá, hungry.
c, catána=batáná, show,
nh, nhódndschodná=chórná, leave.
kh, khigalna=nigalnásnikalná, emerge.
kh, khas=das, ten.
k, köhná-zlónná, mirna, cf. Kashmírí láyun. '
Radesso
* This would make Bhattu, with soft tt, a synonym of Sánsi, but it indicates no connection
with Bhatti or bhat (bard). In Rohilkhand the Sansi is called Bhattu or Bhantu, but the
meaning of the latter word does not appear to be 'bard.' It is not in Platts' Hind. Dictv.
and the usual word for bard is bhát while a jester or mimic is bhand.



870
Sánsi marriage.
Changes formed by additions of letters, sometimes with vowel change :-
b prefixed to vowels, bék=ék, bun=un, béd=éá, béthi=éthí.
k
kódmt=ádmi, man; koth=áth, eight; kódhá=ádhá, half ; kun.
dar=andar.
kh 2 consonants, kharájú=rájí=rází, satisfied ; khadithá=dițhá=Panj. dițh.
tha. Urdu dékhá, seen.
dha e
dha bán=bán=bahin (Urdu) sister ; dhagal:=gala, neck.
Verbs whose roots end in a vowel have sometimes p inserted after the root :-
dépná=déná, give ; lépná=léná, take; hopná==hóná, be.
Verbs whose roots end in ah, change ah to aug.
Kaugná,=kahná, say; raugnú=rahná, remain; áná come, and jáná, go, become asarnd
and jasarná, respectively.
jáná has two criminal past participles, one regular jasariá, one gaugá, formed from gayá
on the analogy of kaugná, raugná, etc.
Birth. - The only custom appears to be that a feast is given to the
people of the community on the birth of a child.
Marriage.*-A curious custom is practised at the time of marriage,
which seems to show some incipient understanding of the universal
principle which governs the reproduction of species in both the vege-
table and the animal world. On the marriage night, before daybreak,
some sharbat is mixed in a pitcher. A pit is then dug in the courtyard
of the house and the branches of a fruitful tree planted in the four
corners. Some of the sharbat and a pice are placed in the pit and the
bridegroom, taking the pitcher on his head, walks seven times round.
The bride follows, accompanied by her mother's brother. After this,
the bridegroom gives some sharbat to the bride, and the remainder is
then divided amongst the men present. This practice seems to indicate
some comprehension of the universal law of reproduction. The same
god or goddess, embodying the principle of reproduction, who causes
the trees to be fruitful and bring forth, is being asked to bestow the
blessings of children on the marriage, which has just been celebrated.
The Sánsis themselves are quite unconscious of the meaning of this
rite and could give no reason for its practice. I think, however, that
its significance is obvious. Some forgotten Sánsi, of a greater degree
of intelligence and imagination than his fellows, probably recognised
the similarity between the fruitfulness of the tree and the fruitfulness
of the individual, and originated this rite in honour of the deity of
fructification. This is the only instance that I have been able to trace
in which the Sánsis bave any religious customs, apart from the most
Gegraded form of ancestor worship. The deity invoked in this rite is
evidently quite distinct from the tribal ancostors Sabos Mal, Mahla and
Bhidu. The pouring of some of the sharbat into the pit as an offering
to the god or goddess and the subsequent distribution of the remainder,
amongst the men present appears to have something of the nature of a
sacrament.
The other customs and rites practised at betrothal and marriage are
as follows:-At the time of betrothal, the father-in-law gives five pice to
his prospective daughter-in-law, and subsequently makes her presents
of clothes at various intervals. At the time of marriage the bride-
* The rest of this article is from a valuable account of the Sánsis in Gujrát prepared by
Mr. J. Misick of the Punjab Police.
+ But in Jind the Sánsis elect one of their own caste as their parohit or priest to perform
their marriage and death ceremonies. He is called the masand or bhagat of Sánsi Mal and
he receives offerings made to him.
NNNN



Sánsi weddings.
371
groom's parent gives seven sheep, an ass, and some wheat to those of the
bride. The value of the presents to be made is, however, not fixed, and
varies according to the circumstances of the parties concerned. The
gána (sacred thread for the wrist), sálu (a red cloth), mahndi (leaves of
a bush used for colouring hands and feet) and one rupee are sent to
the girl's parents a few days before the wedding. On the day of the
ceremony, the procession halts on the way to the bride's house and
arranges the lakha, that is to say, what amount should be paid to the
girl's parents. After this has been settled the procession proceeds to
the girl's house.
A ram, which the bridegroom's party have brought with them is
now killed, and some of the blood is thrown up in the air as the portion
of the tribal deities, Mahla and Bhidu. Water is then sprinkled on
the ram and Mahla and Bhidu are called upon to bestow peace with
the words, thand pána. A pitcher, a cup, a choha (digging instrument)
and some guļ are also brought by the bridegroom's party for the cere-
mony of the fruitful tree, which has already been described. The liver,
feet, and head of the ram are cooked, apart from the rest of the body,
and are eaten by the bride and bridegroom.*
I do not know why particular significance is attached to the number
seven by the Sánsis, and kindred races. Mr. Williams, in his account
* With this may be compared the account received from Jhang. On arrival at the
bride's house the bridegroom slaughters (with a knife he has been provided with) tho goat
which bis people had brought with themselves and as the blood gushes out people of
both the bridegroom's and the bride's parties take some of it in their hands and ex-
claim, as they throw it on the ground, "May there be union and good will among the
bride and bridegroom's people! May there be union and peace between the bride and
bridegroom." The slaughtered goat (less its head, liver, kidneys and legs which are put
aside) is afterwards equally divided between the bride and bridegroom's parties and
they feed their respective people on its flesh. A red tinted thrcad is wound round the
bride's wrist. It is called kangna and is a mark of her bridehood. The bridegroom
and the bride's parties sit in two separate groups in front of the bride's house and some
sharbat is prepared in the earthen vessel and from the sugar brought by the bride.
groom's people. The bridegroom's father gives a little of it to the bride and her father
to drink and the bride's father then gives some of it to the bridegroom and his father.
The rest is kept apart for use later on. Two of the women who accompanied the bride-
groom's party take some floor, sugar and clarified butter to the bride to make halua
which is put in an earthen vessel and is called the cup of chastity. This is afterwards
eaten by the bride and other women.
The bride's father gives that day a dinner to the bridegroom's party. The bridegroom's
best man digs a small hole in the earth and puts two Mansuri pice (= about anna) in
it. Somo green twigs of a kíkar tree are also planted therein and a red-tinted thread
is tied around it. Some of the remaining sharbat is poured in this hole. The vessel
containing the remainder of the sharbat is put on the bridegroom's head and to a corner
of the piece of cloth tied round his waist is knotted a corner of the bride's dopatta (a
sheet worn by women to cover the head and upper part of the body). The bride's
maternal uncle takes her in his arms and with the bridegroom following them they walk
seven times round the hole (dug for the purpose as above mentioned). On completion
of this ceremony the bridegroom gives the piece of cloth that was tied round his
waist with the money in it to the bride. The slaughtered goat's liver and kidney which
were put aside are now grilled (this food is prepared without salt) and given to the pair
to eat. Oa the following day the head and legs of the goat that were also kept apart are
grilled and eaten by the newly married couple. The bridegroom then receives his dowry
and with his newly married wife the party starts on their return journey. On arrival at
his house the father of the bridegroom and his people present ornaments etc. to the bride,
who stops there usually for 7 days. The kangna that was tied round the bride's wrist at
the time of her wedding is now removed. The one rupee and fire pice (that were tied in
the red-tinted cloth worn by the bridegroom round his waist at the timo of marriage) ara
given to the bride, but the piece of cloth itself is preserved by the bridegroom's people,
Somo few days after her return home the girl is fetched back by lier husband,



372
Sánsi death-rites.
of the groupe de lo
sabeurd, and competirer leder eine
of the Kuchbands, writes that the marriage ceremony is performed by
the bride and bridegroom circling seven times round a pole and blowing
seven times on a coal of fire. The choice of the identical number for
the Sápsi marriage ceremony is curious. The bride and bridegroom
walk seven times round the pit in which the branches of the fruitful treo
are planted.
Funeral rites.
At the time of burial gur is divided amongst the men present.
Seven days after the burial a feast is given to their friends by the re-
latives of the deceased. The continual recurrence of the number seven
is curious. When consigning the body to the ground the tribal ances-
tors are invoked and propitiated. In this the malignancy of motive
attributed to the deity is again apparent. To ask a just deity to be
merciful to a man who has lived a virtuous life, according to the ideas
of the society, of which he was a member, is su perfluous and unneces-
sary. To ask a just deity to forgive a man who has transgressed against
the laws of society and left tbe effects and evil influence of his actions
behind him is inconsistent, absurd, and contrary to every law of justice
and equity. Since to attribute such a perverted system of justice to
the deity would be to credit him with a procedure which no man of
sane mind and sound judgment could endorse, it is apparent that the
ultimate origin of such an idea is based upon superstition rather than
upon reason. The elementary train of thought which gave rise to the
custom of worshipping and praying to the deity at time of birth,
marriage and death, is present amongst the Sánsis, untouched by sub-
sequent developments and additions of the human intellect. The sole
object of the propitiatory rites of the Sánsis is to induce their tribal
godlings and evil spirits to refrain from exercising their malignant in.
fluence on the fortunes of the person or persons for whom intercession
is made, By gradual stages and correlatively with the forward moves
of the human intellect, it appears that this fundamental conception of
supernatural beings, as spirits of evil influence, has been enlarged upon,
and embroidered, until malignancy has become magoanimity and
propitiatory rites have become moral duties.
The method of disposing of their dead by burial has been borrowed
from the Muhammadans, and is an innovation of recent years. Proo
vious to their settlement in various villages, where the majority of the
inhabitants are Muhammadans, their dead were disposed of in a manner
similar to that of the Hindus. It is probable that they will adopt the
Mubammadan religion altogether in thé course of time, or that the
Muhammadan's gods and saints will be added to their own demonology.
The so-called conversion of a Sánsi to the Christian or Mubammadan
faith is merely a verbal phrase. The only result of such a conversion
is that the Christian and Muhammadan deities are degraded into occu-
pying positions in the Sansi demonology similar to those held by Sahns
Mal, Mahla, and Bhidu. The intelligence, which left to itself, can
evolve a deity of no higher type than Sahas Mal; which can watch
the inception of new lives, and the extinction of old, without feeling
any curiosity regarding the mysteries of life and death, is utterly
incapable of comprehending the higher ideals and aspirations of the
Christian and Muhammadan religions.
ly a verbasin of a Semill be addecourse of city will a



Sansi superstitions.
379
Sänsi metaphysics.
No attempt has been made to explain or account for the working of
Nature. The origin of gods amongst primitive races is often to be found
in the endowment of natural phenomena, such as thunder and lightning,
wind and rain, with human and personal attributes. The Sánsi, how.
ever, can see and hear, unmoved, such striking and often awe-inspiring
manifestations of nature's working. The faculty of taking things for
granted allows him to feel the force of the rain and the violence of the
wind without experiencing any stimulation of the brain, prompting him
to enquire into, or meditate upon, the causes and meaning of these phe-
nomena. The most natural and simple explanation that the thunder is
the wrath of any angry god, that absence of rain is the displeasure of a
powerful deity, has not even occurred to him. It is most conclusive
proof of his degraded and ipert intellectual state, that he can look upon
the forces of nature at work, without any derangement of his habitual
stolidity, beyond a little personal inconvenience.
Exorcism.-Amongst the Sánsis almost the only indications of the
existence of religious beliefs are contained in tho ceremonies ob-
served at hirth, marriage and death. Although these are of a very
primitive and elementary type, yet the first dawnings of a belief in
the supernatural and the immortalising power of death are apparent.
The common belief amongst Indians is that the Sánsis have neither
gods nor religion. This is however incorrect. Religion in the ab.
stract, as it affects the conduct of man towards his fellows, is cer-
tainly almost non-existent. Superstition, however, has gone a step
further and has resulted in the deification of the tribal ancestors
Sahns Mal, Mahla and Bhidu. These bave been magnified by the
lapse of time into spirits of power and prominence whom it is right
to propitiate at time of birth, marriage, aud death. The powers in-
vested in these deified ancestors appear to be rather of an evil-
working than a benignant type.* For instance, they are not con.
sidered to have any power or inclination to reward the good or
punish the wicked for deeds done on earth. Their sole importance
lies in their ability to exert an evil ivfluence on the fortunes of their
descendants, provided that the due ceremonies for propitiation are not
performed ai important events, such as births, marriages and deaths.
Tbese ceremonies have their counterpart in all other religious observ.
ances where the blessing of the deity is invoked on similar occasions.
The fundamental idea of the deity amongst all the races appears to be
that of a maligpant spirit who is naturally predisposed to exert his evil
influence on the affairs of human beings unless he is duly appeased and
propitiated. Otherwise the motive is not apparent which would cause
him to refrain fron blessing the marriage-union between parties who
may have been of exeinplary conduct and behaviour. If it may be
taken for granted that the blessings and good-will of the deity follow
as a matter of course, upon a inan conducting himself as a just father
* This is in accord with the Jind account which says :-"In honour of Sinsi Mal the Sánsis
distribute karhá or halwá (a kind of sweet porridge) and offer do ghaſs, two small earthon
pots, filled with water, and put cowries in them on the Holi and Dowáli and other festivals
to pacify him."
They also believe in Lál Beg, guru of the Chuhrás, in Jind and offer loaves of broad and
guļ to him, distributing thom among children, etc., at his marhi (monument),



374
Sánsi beliefs.
and a faithful husband, the necessity of asking for these blessings is
superfluous. When a man is conscious of having performed the duties
which are expected of him by the society of which he is a member, the
logical sequence is that the deity will reward him accordingly, unpre-
judiced by the fact of his having performed or not performed certain
propitiatory ceremonies. The underlying reason for the ceremonies
appears to be an innate belief that the deity is a malignant spirit
who desires propitiation iather thau good conduct.
It is interesting to note how entirely distinct and disconnected
his theological system and his conduct appear to the Sánsi intelli-
gence. His gods are merely the spirits of his tribal ancestors invested
with powers for working evil, and as such do not concern themselves
with the question of his having led a good or a bad life according to his
own lights. The sum-total of their demands is that certain propiti-
atory rights should be performed on important occasions. The in.
fluence of a man's conduct during life on his destiny after death,
and the exaltation of demons and evil spirits into celestial beings
who judge a man according to his works are subsequent developments
of the human intellect.
The question of what happens to a man after his death is still an
unsettled one amongst the Sánsis, and the germs of inquiry have
not yet led him to formulate any definite theories on the subject.
The spirits of women who die during childbirth are supposed to lin-
ger on in this world and torment living beings. Persons who die
while in an unclean state, or in an unnatural manner are said to
become evil spirits after death, in the same manner that in ghost
stories the spirit of the murdered man rather than that of the
murderer is generally supposed to haunt the scene of the crime.
The character and conduct of a man during his lifetime are not
considered to be factors which deternine the perpetuation of his
existence after death-his immortality as an evil spirit is determined
only by the outward manner and circumstances of his death. Spirits
possessing a kindly and benign influence are beld to be non-exist-
ent. The inhabitants of the immaterial world are entirely spirits
of a malignant type who, by the uncleau or unvatural manner of
their death, are condemned to haunt their former abodes and enter
into the bodies of living beings. The outward signs of such de-
moniacal possession are insanity and vacancy of mind. In order
to terrify and exorcise the evil spirit into leaving the body of
his victim, the services of a sorcerer cr wizard are requisitioned.
The latter have the common characteristics and stock-in-trade
with which the priestcraft in all ages have performed their officos.
By means of mystic symbols and ceremonies, and by the length,
vigour, and potency of their incantations the evil spirit is sub-
dued and cast out. Insincerity is by no means a necessary adjunct
to these operations. The representative of the priestly caste from
whom enquiries were made stated in all good faith that he had
in person subjugated and turned out numbers of evil spirits. The
descendants of Bhalad, ope of the sons of Mahla, are the sorcerers
and wizards of the Sánsis, and the progenitors of what would be
the priestcraft in a more advanced stage of society.



Sánsi sorcery.
375
There are only three families of the descendants of Bhalad resi-
dent in Gujrat. Two of these live in the Parianwali Police jurisdic-
tion, and one in the Sadr thána of Gujrat. Several families are
stated to live in Gujranwala. All men belonging to this caste
wear a long lock of hair on one side of their head. This lock of
hair is never cut from the time of birth, and grows to about a foot
in length, becoming a matted and tangled mass. The Sánsis were
unable to state what particular significance is attached to this
distinguishiny mark. Beyond exorcising and casting out evil spirits
these men have no other duties to perform in any way connected
with the supernatural. They are generally welcome and invited
to the marriages of other Sánsis, but take no particular part in the
ceremonies. One rupee is generally given to them when they attend
a marriage, as their mere presence is considered to be of service in
warding off the attacks of evil spirits. These spirits are considered
to be quite immaterial and intangible. It is curious that no Sánsi can
testify to having ever seen any of these spirits in material shape and
form. As a rule, vagaries of the imagination or defects in vision are
sufficient to conjure up innumerable ghostly beings.
The method employed by the sorcerers for the purpose of casting
out evil spirits is as follows:-A diagram in the form of a square is
drawn on the ground. The lines of the square are traced with floor
and a red pigment called sandúr. The angles and sides of the
square are joined by lines intersecting at the middle point. A second
god a smaller square is then formed by joining the points at which
the sides of the larger square are bisected. Lamps are then placed in
the four triangles formed at the corners of the larger square, and the
sorcerer sits on one side of the diagram, the possessed by the evil
spirit on the other. A long incantation is then recited with great
rapidity and repeated as long as the evil spirit remains obdurate, and
refuses to quit the body of its victim.
This incantation has been taken down at full length, and a copy is
appended hereto. It is a curious and partly unintelligible medley
of words and names taken from every available religion and my-
thology, and is of a potency calculated to intimidate even the most
daring and obstinate of evil spirits.
An incantation used by Sánsi sorcerers.
Mardan Shah alike dhanak khinch ban mar.
Sultan Saiyad Ahmad Kalrike cangir tan mar,
Iya Shah Sharf ka sab hi se nishan tan mar.
Ustad gur ki ahir se afsar me san mar.
Hanuman Nar Singh ko paták kar pacher mar.
Gurgiyan ki putli jadu ghar tamam uren kache masan Rahte the Ram Ram.
Jab se nayie hua murshad ke labka pia jam.
Jannat deo bir bhut khidmat mangta hain madam.
Hawant ka dum palet ke bhairow ke kanmar,
Mundran pakar kar hath se band karun aur sare sab bhagat.
Nanak hamari taraf gur ki kya lugat.
Zangir tubak dalkar qaid kar sab lagat.
Kya surma bachara bhainsa surma pat.
Rakkdia rakhji ki pakarkar zaban mar.
Raman pakar kalawe sis das rukhta hun.
Aryan bir pando kete but parast.
Harun zabar men thokar jaun zamin men das,
Asri lagaun xarð jaisi bage ki dhanak,



376
Sánsi metaphysics.
Ram te Lachman Sita ka dhiyan marde.
Shamsher bandh de tir tafang so bandh de.
Khanjar wah kitár bhawala phire farag ka sat ka sotha mother bendh de.
Banka bana neza pata ka dhar bandh de.
Kete sete jharaf varun kete ki tan marde.
Pon pani ko bandh de howde se sowar hathi se mahabhat ko bandh de
Parbat wah pahar rabat wah tambura turki tar sab hi bandh de.
Bhati narabda ganga ki nan mar de.
Nadi se bandh de rale ko darya ke lair bandh de,
Atune se bandh de totka jab usse sher bandh de.
Zalam ki chasham bandh de choghal ki zaban chaki ke chal bandh de.
Bichu ka dhag pakarke bandh de dandan xahr bandh de.
Sab aur ghari ghari pair pair bandh de.
Tunbe ko pakarkar hath se bandh de.
Ghat ghat paran bandh de jal jogana ka sati jal jogana patal hain.
Chaunsath jogana aur chattar as pas naran palam ko bandh de.
Babay hagh phunk dhol ki tambura chattis rag ko bandh de.
Ait koran ki assis nang ko bandh de.
Lahore zanjir ka malia shaitan ko mar de.
Ashaq pari shah chher pari ko bandh de.
Rak Siyah mor siyah sital pari ko bandh de.
Rewa ko bandh de jumna ko bandh de.
Barsawti ko bandh de kishna narabda gumairti ko bandh de.
Suraj samundhar seti sulan kalam landh de.
Burkat kalame pak ki sath ga karwar mahamda nar singh ko bandh de.
Jain Khan sadhu daryan singh ko bandh de.
Kul tha karin bawanian mozi an bhairon ko mur de.
Khurshad aini ko chhoti churel churhi ko bandh de.
Kya mantri mari masani mantri sab mantri ko bandh de.
Bakral sudan se awa kalal bandh de.
Nafri ka fareb se bal bal bandh de,
Mundra mohamad ke nam ka sultan saiyad ahmad.
Kalri ke nam ka mundra hazrat janab gir dastogir ghaus asklan karam tute,
Sattar san bilar bahaten san kalabar ganjir ta kalaba.
Nah afat chute barkat kalme par ke sath.
All efforts to obtain a translation of this incantation have failed
The Sápsis themselves do not know it, and the Sayyid of the Khángáh
of Hafiz Hayát, who taught it, is dead. It is however published here
in the bope that a translation will eventually be found.
An interesting legend is related regarding the parentage of Sahns
Mal, the founder of the Sánsi race, and the principal deity of their
religion. His mother is said to have been a princess : the daughter
of a great king who ruled over the countries in the neighbourhood of
the Lakhi Jangal. While crossing a river in a boat one day, she saw a
flower come floating down with the stream. As it passed the boat,
she picked it out of the water and inhaled its perfume. The genesis
of her son Sahns Mal was thus performed. When advancing into a
state of pregnancy, her father the king noticed her condition, and,
incensed at her want of purity, cast her out from his home. She filed
to the Lakhi Jaogal, and sheltered by a faqir gave birth to a son
who was Sahos Mal, the common ancestor of all the Sansis.
Numerous instances have been quoted in standard works on com-
parative religion showing how intimate a relation the idea of an
immacu ate conception bears to that of godhead. Illustrations prov-
ing the universality of this connection are found in the religion of
almost every race. It is possible that this legend of the Sánsis way
be an example of the same universal train of thought, the exhalations
of a flower being substituted for the divine spirit. It is, however,
difficult to credit the limited intellect of a Bánsi with the imagi.
native faculty and a certain poetio sentiment implied in this legend.



Sánsi ordeals.
877
I am, therefore, inclined to think that it may have been grafted
on to the person of Sahns Mal, after the Sánsis came into contact
with higher and more advanced races, fossessing a greater wealth of
tradition and legend. The possibility of its having been borrowed
from another race does not, however, controvert the theory that, at
certain stage of civilisation, all races have & natural tendency to
look upon their gods as having been immaculately conceived.
The Sánsis have framed certain laws and penalties amongst them-
selves to deal with offences which appear to them to be deserving of
punishment. Periodical gatherings are held at which tribal disputes,
marriage complications, etc., are settled by men chosen from the tribe
for their intelligence and impartiality. These men are called Num-
berdárs and the parties in all matters onder dispute agree to abide by
their decision. Such a thing as a Sángi taking his case into a regular
court of law is entirely unknown, and reports to the Police are equally
unheard of. Private settlement of cases by reference to the lambar-
dárs of the tribe is invariably preferred to the trouble, expense and
inconvenience of a trial by law.* The punishments inflicted upon
offending parties generally take the shape of fines varying from five
to twenty and thirty rupees according to the seriousness of the offence.
It is a significant fact that burglaries and thefts are not included
under the heading of offences. To murder, to assault, to abduct one's
neighbour's wife is an offence according to Sánsi ideas, but to steal and
pilfer is merely a legitimate and natural means of obtaining the
necessaries of life. The fts amongst themselves are rare, partly due to
the feeling that a common bond of brotherhood unites all Sánsis, and
partly due to the fact that it is very seldom that they ever possess any.
Thiog worth stealing. Beyond a few simple cooking utensils nothing
of value is retained. Any excess on the requirements of the moment
is allowed to remain over for future use, in pursuance of the same
*" The Sánsis do not usually resort to Government courts of law for redress of their
grievances. However grave a crime may be, they settle it among themselves. The com
mon practice is that the aggrieved party lays its complaint before a panch of the community
which the panch sends for the other party, inquires into the matter and endeavours to brino
about an amicable settlement. If it be unsuccessful in it, it invites other panches and
members of their community. The contesting parties have to deposit Rs. 5 each towards
expenses of the meeting and are made responsible for any further expenses that may
occur. The panches and others on assembling, hear statements of both the parties and, in
the event of their being successful in bringing about an amicable settlement, proper indemnitor
is caused to be made to the aggrieved party. If not, the following are the usual wava
of determining the guilty person :
1. The parties are made to spit on the holes where insects reside. This is considered
å serious oath and the person at fault is supposed to desist from doing so.
2. Thoy are made to swear by Devi and Lakh-Dáta, the objects of their worship.
3. A rupee and a pice are thrown in boiling oil and the person considered guilty is
asked to draw out with his hands the silver coin. If he is guilty he would shrink from
doing so, on account of the consciousness of his guilt. If innocent he readily does so.
This method is, however, now very rarely practised.
4. A bamboo is erected in water and the person considered guilty is asked to dive.
holding the bamboo all the tine in his hands. If he comes up immediately he is ada
judged guilty, whereas if he can remain in water for some time he is considered innocent
5. A rupee and a pice are covered (separately) with flour-paste and thrown into a
vessel filled with water. The person considered guilty is required to take out one of
the two pasted articles. If the article he takes out is found to be the pico he is considered
guilty ; wbereas if it be the rupee, he is held innocent.
The panches have the right to inflict any punishment they like on the party adiudged
guilty and their decisions are accepted and submitted to without demur or obiection



378
Sánsi habits.
instinct which induces a dog to bury a bone, and unearth it on the
following day; but definite economy and foresight are never practised.
I have heard that Sánsis are occasionally employed as labourers in the
cultivation of fields. The proportion who attempt to obtain a living
by manual labour is, however, almost negligeable. Several villages
have employed Sánsis in the capacity of chaukidárs or watchmen. It
is said that the remainder consider it a point of honour not to roba
village in which a Sánsi is acting as chaukidár.
The physique of the race is exceptional, and the men are possessed
of phenomenal powers of endurance and insensibility to fatigue. A
journey of twenty-five or thirty kos in one day is by no means an
impossibility for a Sánsi, and they are known to have committed
burglaries in villages seven or eight kos distant from their homes, and
to have returned to their villages before daylight on the next morning. *
Degeneration of the race through intermarriage with near relations is
strictly interdicted, and no Sánsi is allowed to marry in his own got.
It is only very recently that the Sánsis have settled down in
fixed homes and abodes. Their own statements show that up to the
last thirty or thirty-five years ago, they used to wander indefinitely
about the district living in pakhis or temporary shelters of straw
matting or thatch. During this life, their sole means of existence
must necessarily have been either alms or theft and the thirty or
thirty-five years which have elapsed since their settlement in various
villages have been insufficient for them to fully recognise the fact
that society does not permit its members to obey the promptings of
nature, by, which a man is naturally inclined to utilize anything and
everything for his own sustenance, regardless of ownership. The Sánsi is
still in the suckling stage of human progress, where he expects to receive
the means of sustaining life direct from the parent nature. To ask a
Sáosi to work and labour for his daily necessaries is as much an anomaly
as to ask an infant at the breast to earn the nourishment it receives by
personal effort. The stage in the life of the individual corresponds with
the stage in the evolution of mankind. During his wandering life of a
few decades tho Sánsi was perfectly at liberty to entrap the ownerless
creatures of the jungle and to gather any fruits, plants or leaves grow-
ing in a wild state. His brief acquaintanceship with a domiciliary
civilisation has not been sufficient to impress him with the fact that the
same liberty cannot be extended to his neighbour's cattle and crops.
* The Handbook of the Criminal Tribes of the Puninb says that Sinsi males are generally
dark in complexion with bright sparkling eyes, while the females are more often fair. Their
faces are cast in the aboriginal mould and are very •foxy' in expression. The hair of the
face or head is grown or removed according to the custom of the country in which they
most usually reside. They are often to be found with shock heads of hair and often, again,
shaved with the exception of the Hindu tuft which is sometimes the only evidence of their
Hinduism. The fairness of complexion which a great number of the Sánsis undoubtedly
possess is to be attributed to adnixture of blood due to the kidnapping of children of
higher castes, the introduction of outside elements, and the illicit connections formed by
Sánsi women with persons of decent status. The fleetness and agility of the males has
always been noticed, as has the Amazon-like nature of their women-folk. But the Sansi
though wiry, active and no mean-athlete is not big boned or exceptionally powerful.
Sánsis, it is said, can always be detected by their smell which is described as a combination
of musk-rat and rancid grease.
t One of their favourite maxims illustrative of the manner of their living is-Boi bájri hoi
ák, ab boi so tin taláq.



Sansiál-Sant.
379
Dress.-Sánsis wear the trági, a cotton cord round the loins, and said
not to be used by any other class. Panjábí Sánsis usually wear the
hair long and keep twisted within its coils a small sharp knife,
called kapu, used for purse-cutting. The nails of the right thumb and
index finger are kept long for similar purposes. Sánsi women dress
elaborately for festive occasions, but the usual attire of both sexes is
rarely anything more than a langoti.
Two septs in Siálkot, the Sochibh or Lochibh and the Tatta are said
to be half Sánsi by descent. A sub-division of the Wattus in Ferozepur
is also said to go by the same name and to be in all respects similar to
the Sánsis, though it is recognized as belonging to the Bhatti brother-
hood and is, nominally at least, Musalmán. The Barela Chuhțas **
of Lahore and the Lamma are also said to be closely assimilated
to the Sánsis of Gurdaspur and Sialkot, as they actuaily intèrmarry
with them and conceal their outlaws. The Barar of the upper Mánjha,
the Gandhílas and Bangális can hardly be called akin to the Sánsis
save by their habits.
(2). A Hindu Jáy clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery and
Amritsar. In the latter District Rájá Sánsi, a village 7 miles from
Amritsar is the ancestral home of the Sindhánwália family which
claims Rájput descent and belongs to this got. They are also found in
Gujranwala.
In Gujranwala they are described as an offshoot of the Bhatti clan
and they take their name from one Sánsi, whose great-grandson, Udrat,
came from Bhatner in Hindustan 18 generations ago, and adopted a
pastoral life in that district. His sons, Jatri and Sundar, took to
agriculture. They intermarry with the Goraya, Wirk, and other Ját
communities. Adoption is common † The custom of pagrivand pre-
vails. When a Sánsi introduces into his brotherhood a wife from a
different tribe, all the women of his tribe dine with her. This ceremony
is called got kunála. None but Sánsi women and the new bride are
admitted to this meal. Though the wife is thus admitted into the
tribe and from the date of her marriage observes all the ceremonies
of the Sánsis, she continues to be called by the name of her own parents'
caste. The original priests of the Sánsis belong to the Kália sub-caste,
who reside in Sugar chak in the Bhatner province, but none of them
now reside in Gujranwala. The rank and influence of the Sandhanwalia
family, who belong to this tribe, and the renown of their representa-
tive the great Maharaja Ranjit Singh, have given lasting political
notoriety to the Sánsis.
SANSIÁL, a Rájput clan of the 2nd grade, found in the Dugar or Jammu
circle, according to Bingley : Dogras, p. 27.
SANSOI.-See under Dáolí.
SANT, Sant, fem. -Aní, a saint, a devotee. The Panjabi Dicty., p. 1011,
derives it fr. the Latin sanctus.
* A tribe not elsewhere alluded to. But the Vangális or Bangális of the upper Bár, who
eat the snakes they kill, are said to be a class of Sánsis. Itinerant snake-charmers are
doubtless often of Sánsi origin.
7 It is said that the adoption of a boy who has been betrothed cancels his betrothal.



380
Sánwal Sháhi-Saqqa.
SÁNWAL Sasuís.- In the Indus valley is found a Sikh sect called Sanwal, or
Some Sháhís, from a gurú Sánwal Shah,* a disciple whom Bábá Nának
deputed in 1489 to preach his doctrines in the south-west Punjab.
The title Sháh appears, however, to have given rise to other stories,
according to one of which Sánwal Shah was an Aroſa of Amritsar
whose father supplied Gurú Rám Dás with funds for the building of
the Golden Temple. Under Gurú Govind Singh Sanwal Shah Singh
preached Sikhism on the frontier, and Some Sbáb was his brother.
The sect, or rather the followers of Sánwal Shah, Some Shah, and the
former's descendant Báwá Sháh, are found in Dera Ismail Khán,
Multán and Muzaffargarh, and even beyond the frontier.
Sápádia, a sub-caste or group found, like Nág and Nágla, in many castes
including the Musallis. The term indicates dexterity in the art of
snake-catching rather than a totemistic origin : Punjab Census Repti,
1912, p. 431, § 574.
SAPAILá, fem. -AN, a keeper of snakes, a spake-charmer. Panjabi Dicty.,
p. 1012: see next.
Sapásá, a snake-catcher or keeper. Panjábi Dicty., p. 1012.
SAPELÁ, SAPERA OR Sipádá, a snake-catcher or charmer. In the Hill States
the Nagálút and Naglu are said to be snake-charmers, like the Sapelas.
Sapándí, Sapáda, Sapád, Sapáhda, Sapiade are other forus of the
word. The Sapelas or Sampelas claim to be an offshoot of the Jogis-
see Vol. II, p. 409, supra.
SAPRÁ, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SaPráí, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SAQQA, Arab., a carrier or vendor of water: a cup-bearer. The Saqqás are
Muhammadap watermen. They claim to be Rajputs by origin, as
their several sub-castes-Bhatti, Chauhan, Punwar, Tur and Bhalim
show. The Punwar Saqqás claim to be descendants of Rája Jagdev.
The Rajput Saqqas used to avoid four gots in marriage in former
times, but now-a-days they follow the Muhammadan law. They practise
karera and polygamy. Some of them also claim to be Gorga Pathans,
from gor, a Persian word for grave, as their ancestor is said to have
beon born in his dead mother's grave. Originally Patháns they after-
wards took to carrying water and so were called Saqqás.
There are also Chirimár Saqqás, who were originally fowlers or bird
catchers, bat took to carrying water in skins and were so called Saqqás.
As regards occupation they are simply watermen, but some of them
are also agriculturists. The caste is more strongly organized in Rohtak
and Gurgaon than elsewhere, for it has caste panchayats in those two
districts. In the latter the Saqga panchayat has a chaudhri or presi.
dont, a munsif or arbitrator, and a sumber or footman (piáda) in
addition to the members who vary in number from 20 to 50 according
to the number of villages included in the group.
* The descendants of this gurú are known as Sánwal-Sháb-potra. Their disciples are
tyled Nának-sháhis.
't But the Nagálu is also described as a worker in bamboo, from nirgál.



Sard-Sarai.
381
In Loháru they return the following yots in addition to the Bhalím :
Sayyid, Qureshi, Khokhar, Turkman and Khainchi, aud just as the
Bhalím and Khainchi claim Rajput origin, so the Sayyids and Qureshi
claim descents from those castes. The Gori, as they are called in this
State, claim to be Patháns. They specially affect Khwaja Khizr and
when a rat gnaws a hole in a waterskin they attribute the misfortune
to his displeasure.
Saká, a tribe, partly Hindu, partly Muhammadan, found in Montgomery.
Doubtless the same as the Sarai.
SARÁr, fem. -Ní, & money changer or banker. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1015.
Arab. Sarráf.-The Sarráf is the agent for the distribution of the
precious metals, as the Sunár is the worker in them. Sometimes
à customer will ornaments through a sarráf who employs a gold.
smith, but is responsible for his work. Occasionally too he keeps &
stock of ready-made jewellery made for them by journeymen gold-
smiths. He also supplies bullion to be made over to the Sunár,
and tests and weighs the ornaments when made up, but for this
purpose it is advisable to employ the sarraf of another village. He will
also value gold or silver for a commission, and settle the price of
an article. In the same way every goldsmith has his sarráf. He
watches the market and imports bullion, as well as being a wholesale
dealer in old jewellery, so that he is practically the Sunár's banker. He
advances him bullion, charging interest on loans overdue, but only
allowing a meagre discount on loans paid before they fall due. Ho
is generally trustworthy but as he lends to the goldsmith on little or
no security and is subject to some temptation as arbiter between him
and his customers he is reputed to connive with the former at times
to the latter's detriment. Occasionally too he is implicated in melting
down stolen ornaments.* The Chopra Khatris are said to have an
al called Sarráf in Jullundur, while the Sioni section or got is said to
nean a dealer in gold.'t
SABAHIRA, & tribe, -Panjabi Dicty., p. 1015. Doubtless the same as the
SARERA.
Saráí, (1) a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SARAI.-(1) A Ját tribe found in Amritsar and Gurdaspur, in which latter
District its members are sometimes called Shaikhs, as being leaders of
the Sultánias or followers of Sakhi Sarwar. As such they receive small
offerings, though they are rather shy of admitting the fact. It is not
certain that this tribe is distinct from (2).
(2) A tribe of Játs chiefly found in Gurdáspur and Siálkot, though
there are a few on the upper and middle Sutlej also. There are said
to be Sarái Rajpats in Sialkot, who are Bhattis descended from an
ancestor called Saráí who settled in the Hafizábád tahsil. Sarai is
also said to be a well-known Ját clan in Jullundur and the neighbouring
districts. Tod makes Sahrái the title of a race of Panwár Rájputs who
founded a dynasty at aror in Sindh on the eastern bank of the Indus
and "gave their name Sehl or Sehr as a titular appellation to the coun-
88, thour followers of Sakhi Scalled Shaikhs, pas bin which latt
efly found in G
atlej also. Thered from an
* For some further details as to the sarráf's interest and profits see N. I. N. Q., 1, $ 946,
† P. N. Q., I, 8 905.



382
The Sarai or Balhora.
try and its princes, and its inhabitants the Sehrais." The Sarai of
Gurdaspur returned themselves in 1881 as tribh Sindhu, clao Sarai, but
the Sindhu appear to have no such sept. The Sarai may, however be
an offshoot of the Sindhu and they certainly do not intermarry with
that tribe.
(3) The title of the Kalhora family of Rájanpur in Dera Gházi
Khán, which is known as that of the Mián Sáhib Sarai. According
to Mackenzie the Saráis have a holy reputation and retain an uncut
lock on the crown of their heads-whence the title (fr. sir,.head').
But the Dera Gházi Khán Gazetteer (1898) says that males of the Sarai
family do not cut the hair or moustache, and that Sarai is a common
term for a native of Sind,
The Kalhora family is related to the prophet Ibrahin and descended
from Ismail. Its ancestors were directly connected with Hazrat Abbás,
uncle of the prophet and so a Quraish by tribe. It is therefore called
Abbási. About 100 H. its members dispersed over Arabia, Iráq and
Persia, but its head-quarters were at Baghdad, and it played its part
in the early Muhammadan invasions of Aleppo, in which place it settled,
remaining till 1068 H. In that year Adam Shah with 3,000 men of his
own tribe marched down to Haidarábád in Sindh from Aleppo owing
chiefly to dissensions among his brothers. The Abrá family was then
ruling in Sindh and its chief evinced great respect for Adam Shah
Abbási, granting him land for his maintenance, and so on. The system
of making disciples or murids was instituted by Adam Shah in Sindh.
Adam Shah died soon after and was buried at Sukkur, where his shrine
is still visited annually by his followers, Tukri Adam Shah in that town
being named after him. Dáúd, his eldest son, succeeded to the throne
and reigned peaceably for 7 years. On his death Mián Jliás was in-
stalled on the gaddi, and was acknowledged as the first supreme spirit-
ual guide. Thousands of ail sects became murids in his time and his
spiritual influence extended to Sindh, the Punjab, and elsewhere. Mián
Iliás lived for 5 years and was succeeded by Mián Nasir Muhammad,
who is called the star of the family, owing to his popularity, preaching
and righteousness. In 1102 H. Yár Muhammad, the first chief of the
Abbási family, attempted to establish tis rule in Sindh, which at that
time was under the domination of the Punwár family. He succeeded in
taking the country and expelling the Punwárs out of Sindh where he
reigned for 15 years. Records now in possession of the Sarái family
show that he ruled it well. In 1117 H. Yár Muhammad died and his
son, Núr Muhammad, the first Kalhora, king, was installed on the
gaddi. He ultimately succeeded in forming a state, bounded on the
west by the territory of Bhagnari, on the north by Kot Sabzal, on the
south by Karachi and on the east by Umrkot. Marviwala. After a
reign of 50 years he died and was succeeded by Ghulam Shah, who
extended his territory as far north as Kalábágh. He had always been
in contact with the Mirránis and Muhammad Khán Gujar at Dera
Gházi Khan and the Sikhs at Multán. He also fought several battles
with the Patbáns on the Dera Ismail Khan border. Shortly after this
rapid rise to power he died about 1172 H. Mián Muhammad Sarfaráz
succeeded his father. He died childless, and his territory fell into the
hands of Mián Abdul Nabi, brother of Ghulam Shah Kalhoru. Abdul
Nabi's fickleness and incapacity led to revolt. Mir Bahrám Khán Tálpur
roiganded his in the Sikhs atera Ismai72 H. and his ter KultorianTalo
tachán anans on the died about childless, ular SboBahráno



Sarai history.
383
ere davolted to Hee Su long de his son Mián and the presentabased
was Ghulam Shah's chief minister and the courtiers, owing to a grudge
against him, informed Abdul Nabi th:t Bahrám Khún was stirring up
civil war against him. To remove this suspicion Abdul Nabi demand-
ed Bahrám Khán's daughter in wedlock, but the Mir, acting upon
family usage, refused to accede to the request, whereupon the Mián
secretly murdered him. His son, Mir Bijjar, had at that time gone on
a pilgrimage to Mecca, and on his return the Mián appointed him wazir.
But, as the people were at heart opposed to the Tálpurs, they continued to
complain to the Mián that Mir Bijjar was fomenting disturbatices in the
country. Mir Bijjar had however considerable influence among the
military officers and chiefs and the Mián could not get rid of him open-
ly, so had him treacherously assassipated with the aid, it is said, of the
Mahárája of Jodhpur. The Tálpur and Leghári Baloch then in Sindh
having seen two of their chiefs put to death in succession fell upon the
Mián and drove him out of Sindh Abdul Nabi fled westward and
appealed to Ahmad Shah Durráni. With the aid of a Durráni force
he reconquered Sindh but had hardly reigned for two years when the
Baloch again rovolted against him and finally usurped his territory.
The Mián was obliged to flee to Kola Makhdúm, a village near Rájan-
pur, where he remained for a long period. He had with him a large
number of men consisting entirely of his followers, and they persuaded
him to march to Leia and Mankera, now in Miánwali. That territory
was then in the possession of the Jaskáni Baloch and the Mián easily
succeeded in conquering it. Settling in it he despatched representatives
to do homage to the king of Khurásán, and the Durráni king, pleased
with his submission, bestowed upon him the territories of Leia and
Mankera at a quit-rent. There he spent 6 peaceful years, but he cele-
brated the marriage of his son, Mián Fazl Ali, at such vast expense that
he was unable to pay the quit-rent. Sháh Muhammad Khan and
Sarfaraz Khán Baddozai seized their opportunity and induced the
authorities in Khurásán to grant them a sanad of his territories. The
Mián had a considerable force, but he first tried to conciliate his enemies.
The Pathans, however, stubbornly refused to listen to his envoys and
so the Mián sent out his eldest son, Muhammad Arif, with a number of
men to check their advance. Between Bhakhar and Kahror the two
armies met and a regular battle was feught. The Patháns were at
first defeated, but the Mián's troops, instead of pursuing them, fell
to looting. A Sikh caravan then in the vicinity fired in self-defence
upon his men and a stray bullet killed Muhammad Arif. His shrine is
at Leia.* When the Pathans got the news of his death they attacked
the Mián's force and defeated it. In his sorrow at the death of his son
and the defeat of his army he left Leia and weni to Jodhpur, where
Mabárája Bhim Singh received him with respect and entertained him
honourably, granting a jágír to the descendants of Muhammad Arif
which is still held by the family. The Mián continued to send petitions
to Ahmad Shah Durráni for the restoration of Sindh and at last the
Durrani king sent Muhammad Khan with a sanad granting him heredi-
tary rights in the Rájappur jágír, then estimated to be worth Rs. 4,000.
Mián Abdul Nabi then went to Rájanpur and eventually settled at
HT
* This probably explains why we find Saraí or Sirál, defined also as "a title of the
murids of Mián Nur Muhammad and Mubammad Arif of some place near Bhakkar." These
murids are scattered over the 'Thal.



884
Saraj.
Hájipur, which had come into the family in this wise :-When Mián
Nur Muhammad was ruling in Sindh he had espoused a sister of Mir
Nasir Khán, the Brahúi Nawab, so when Minu Abdul Nabi fell on evil
times he sent his youngest Son, Faul Ali, to Mir Nasir Khán for pro-
tection and the latter granted his guest a third of the income of Hajipur
for his maintenance. The Dajal and the Harrand tracts were then
under Brahúi rule.
But the Sarai conquest of this territory may have been much older.
According to Mackenzie Kamal Khán Mirráni was killed and succeeded
by one Nur Muhammad Sarai who, with Ghulam Sháb, a kalhora
Abbássi, came from Umrkot in Sindh. Nur Muhammad enlarged the
boundaries of the tract lately under Mirráni rule as far as Mahmúd Kot
on the south. He met the Siáls on the Jhelum, pushed back the
Jaskáni Biloch on the north and took possession as far as Darya
Khán. Pollock dated Ghulam Shah's advent as late as 1767-8 A. D.,
when he dispossessed the Dera Gházi dynasty of the Deraját. But
Mackenzie believed that the Sarai had held possession of the Sindh
Ságar country long before Dera Gházi fell under their rule. This, he
observed, would reconcile the two accounts in all points, except the name
of the first Sarai, Ghulam Shah, a name which does not appear to have
been transmitted as a title, after the manner of Gházi Khán, Ismail
Khan and Kamal Khán. The Saddozai undoubtedly conquered the
country in 1792 and, if Ghulan Shah and Nur Muhammad only came
from Sindh in 1768, there would be no room for the Gujar and Jaskáni
rulers between that year and 1792. Pollock states that Muhammad
the Gujar was the Ghazi Khán's wazir, and that he incited the Sarais to
wrest the southern Deraját from his master, then a minor. This the
Sarais did and then put Muhammad into power under themselves.
If this be correct, Muhammad must have held the Sindh Ságar country
from the Sarais, but the current version is that he wrested it from
them armed with a sanad from Delhi, and his death at Sirhind lends
colour to this story.
The customary rule against cutting the hair has led to a story that
the founder of the Kalhora family was a disciple of Bábá Nának. and
there is a couplet which says :-
Sikh Sarai donon Bhái, Bábá Nának put banái.
- The Sikhs and the Sarais are both brothers, Bábá Nának made them
his song. Another account is that Adam Shah, to keep up his attention
when at prayers, used to tie himself by the hair to a beam, and wore
lis hair long so that it might be useful for this purpose. Hence arose
the habit of never cutting thu hair. The Sarais are all Shińs, and have
many followers in Sindh. They tie their hair in a knot on the crown of
the head instead of at the side of the head as the Sikhs tie it. The
Samai abjure the use of tobacco. The head of the family still maintains
its dignity by sitting on a gaddi, and never rising whoever enters the
room. Till the death of Táj Muhammad a pair of kettledrums were
always played whilst the Mián Sahib remained upon the gaddi, and the
present Mián, who bears the title of Shah Nawáz Khán, is still called
Sarkár by the people.
woke fem ní. à saddler : one who embroider3 silk and tinsel on shoes.
Árab. sarráj, a saddler. Panjábi Dicty., p. 1015.
made intend the Sind wrested ita hendes
Bhai, Bóth brother has to be out here Alence
the hair long so that it mich himself by the hair to keep up his made them



Saráji-Sarera.
385
SARÁJI, an inhabitant of the Saráj or highlands of Kulu and Mandi.
SARAN, & Ját got which claims Rájput origin. Its ancestor migrated from
Saharanpur and lost status by marrying a Ját widow. It is found in
Jind.
SARANGIÁ, fr. sarangi or súrangé, a player on the sarangi or fiddle. Panjabi.
Dicty., p. 1016.
SARAO, a Ját tribe found in Jind. It worships ancestors, having bakhúhas*
at Ballamgarh, near & pond, where their jatherás or ancestors are
worshipped at weddings.
Saras, a very small caste or sub-caste found at Banúr in Pațiálá. They
travel with merchandize on pack animals. They appear to be found
also in Ferozepur io which district they work as labourers on roads, etc.
Sarawán, a camel-driver. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1017. See Sarwán.
SARAWAT, SAROT, a Ját tribe found in Jínd. It claims to be Tur Rájput by
origin. Its ancestor conquered a small tract in that State in Akbar's
time and thus obtained the title of Surbirt or chieftain, whence the
name Sarawat or children of Sar (Sur).
In Gurgaon it is called Sárot and holds 24 villages, including Hodal,
in that District.
SARÁTE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Sárbán or SARBÁN, a camelman in Dera Gházi Khán, where they are all
Játs. In fact Ját is very often used as an equivalent for Sárbán. In
Lahore Sarbán=Baloch.
SARBANGQI, fem. -An, from sarbang: one who eats indiscriminately from the
hands of all castes alike : a class of faqir. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1017.
Cf. Sarbhangi.
SARBHANGI, (1) see under Nanga : (2) a synonym of AGHOBI : seo under
Saniási : (3) Among the Chubras, Sarbhangi appears to mean a priest
of some kind.
Sardi. See under Utinánzai.
SARDIYE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SARERÁ, SAREHRA, SARRABRA, or in Amritsar SADARA. A low caste onio
reurrned from Kangſa and the adjacent territories. I In Kángra they
are for the most part general labourers, and they specially scutch cotton
like the Penja or Dhunia of the plains and are also said to make stone
* A bakhúha consists of a pit and a pillar formed of the earth dug out of it. As there
are generally three or four together the word is commonly used in the plural. They
form a place prepared in memory of and used for the worship of departed ancestors :
Panjabi Dicty., p. 82.
+ 'One account is that the title was conferred by Akbar!
| Hutchison says the Riháras are native to Brahmaur and the Sera ras' to the outer hills :
Chamba Gazetteer, p. 163. Sareras, however, seein to be found as far west as Hazára for
E. Molloy says that the Karráls of that district are regarded by everybody but themselves
as a tribe of low origin, a view borne out by the fact that no tribe will marry with them
but Sareras : P.N. Q., II, $ 282. But this account is irreconcilable with Wace's account of
the KERRALS.



386
Saresar-Sarwáni.
mortars, but they are likewise largely employed in field-labour. They
are outcastes of much the same status as the Chamárs and almost
all of them are Hindus. The correct spelling seems to be Sarahiſa.
SARESAR, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SARBURÁ, SAREWARÁ, a Jaiņi, a Jaiņ devotee who wears a cloth over his
mouth to avoid inhalation of animalculæ. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1018. Cf.
SEURA.
Sargána, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Sarhaní, a Mabtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Sardarí, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SARI KÁRIGAR, a carpenter (=tarkhán) in Pesháwar.
SARÍN. A group of the KHATRIS. See also under Seth.
SARLAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SAROHA, a Rájput tribe from which the GHATWÁL Játs of Rohtak claim
descent. Cf. Saroiah.
SAROIAH, (1) a Ját clan; (2) an Awán clan, both agricultural, found in
Amritsar; (3) a tribe of Rájputs apparently extinct in the Punjab
as a separate tribe. Descent from it is claimed by the Dhillon and
Goráya Játs,* by the Hinjra (e)t, Badechh and Dhindsa Játs,# and by
the Phularwán Rájputs. A village in Sialkot is, however, owned by
Saroah Rájputs. Il Cf. Saroha and Tak Seroab.
SAROT, a tribe of Játs, found in Gurgaon. See Sarawat.
SARRÁRA, a tribe found in Hazára which belongs to a race inhabiting Chibhál,
or the hill country of Kashmír on the Hazára border, and, according
to Wace, akin to the same ethnic group as the Dhúnd, Satti, and
Kharral of the same tract. They are chiefly found in the Abbottábád
tahsil, where they are purely agricultural. They are all Musalmán
and are probably quite distinct from the Sarera of the eastern hills.
SARAR, (1) a Ját clan found in Multán: (2) an Aráiņ clan found in
Amritsar (both agricultural),
SARTORA, literally (it is supposed) 'of diminished bead. The son of a Rajput
by a maid-servant. See uuder Manhás also.
SARWÁN, -AWÁN, fem. -Aní, a .camel-driver. Panjúbi Dicty., p. 1024.
Sarwání, a Pathan clan (agricoltural; found in Amritsar.
SARWÁNI, a Pathán tribe, recognized by Ibbetson as akin to the Ghilzai
and Lodi tribes of the Matti branch of that race. It never rose to
prominence and is now bardly known in Afghánistán, but it settled
south of the Lúni in Dráhan und Chandhwan in the northern part of
the tract immediately under the Sulaimán range. Weakened by
feuds with the Súr, however, it was driven out of that territory into
* Hist. of Sialkot, p. 25. † Ib., P. 26. I 16., p. 27. & 1b., p. 28. || 16., p. 52.
The Sarwáni tribe must not be confused with the Sarbani branch of the Patháns. The
name has of course nothing whatever to do with sarwán, a camelman.



Sarwar-Sarwi.
387
Hindustan by the Mián Khel. Sarwani Pathans are now to be found
in the Punjab, e. g. in Gurdáspur, in which district they are styled
Maleria* and give the following account of their origin :-They claim
descent from Shah Hussain, who was driven from Ghor in the time of
Walih bin Abdul-mulk bin Mirwan Hajáj bin Yusaf Saqfi who
overran the country. Shah Hussain took refuge with Shaikh Butan
(Baitan), the son of Iyáz Abdur-rashíd. His pedigree is given
in the Mujama-ul-ansab, a history of Afghánistán, and traces bis descent
to Noáh through Babram ibn Shansab, the ancestor of Shaháb-ud-dío,
Ghori.
Sháb Hussain fell in love with Mato, the daughter of Shaikh Butan,
who sent one Kagdur to enquire into Shah Hussain's antecedents in
bis native land. This Kagdur did and finding out all the facts as
to his ancestry returned home, but, before informing the Shaikh, he
went to Sbáb Hussain and exacted from him a promise that he would
marry Mati his own daughter first. la consequence Shah Hussain
first married Mati and then Matu, the Shaikh's daughter. She shortly
after gave birth to a son who was named Gilzai, the son of a concealed or
secret birth, gil meaning a thief. The son of Mati was named Sarwani
and Matu's second son, Ibrahím, was nick-named Lodhi. Thus Lodhi,
Ghilzai and Sarwani were the sons of the same father.
The tribe was probably given to fire-worship, but was converted
in the time of Ali. The Sarwáni's are Sunnis in the Punjab, but are
said to be Shias also in Persia.
The social observances of the Sarwani do not differ in any material
respects from those of other Muhammadan tribes of similar status.
After the betrothal, Rs. 11 are given by the parents of the boy
to those of the girl in the morning after the date of the marriage has
been fixed. The fixing of the date is called gandh pána (lit. to knot
a thread'). The gift is called mithi rakibi or sweet dish' and is
intended for the girl's jholi or purse, as pin-money.
The got kunála used to be celebrated, but it is said to be now obsolete.
It consisted in the women of the boy's family eating with the bride.
This ceremony was meant to admit the wife into the husband's family.
The women of the family sat down and ate from one dish with the
bride. A wife does not mention her husband's name, nor those of his
elder male relatives.
SARWAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SARWARDIA.One of the Be-nawá or irregular Islámic orders, and 'followers
of Hasan Basri of Básra near Baghdad. They worship seated, chant-
ing at short intervals and in measured tones the word Alláhu, which is
articulated with a suppressed breath and as if ejaculated by a powerful
effort. The devotee often faints with the exertion.' See SAHRWARDIA.
SARWARIA, a follower of Sakhi Sarwar : see Sultánia.
SARWARKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
Sarwí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
* The term Maleria is said to be derived from Maler Kotla, the State to the south of
Ludhiána which is ruled by a Pathán family,



388
Satardári-Satnámi.
SATARDÁRí, a Sayyid clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SATEGRAD, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SATBAND (1) an Aráin clan and (2) & Kamboh clan (both agricultural)
found in Amritsar.
SÁTHAR, a term of unknown origin. The hill people of Sirmur, especially
those of the trans-Giri country, are divided into two great factions
called Sátbar and Pásar, who are believed to be the descendants of the
Pándavas and Kauravas or of their followers and disciples. These
factions do not intermarry with each other, nor do they care to eat and
smoke together, indeed until quite recently they were at feud with each
other. Though open fights have long since ceased to occur get the old
enmity still subsists. Neither faction has any leader. Formerly all the
people of a bhoj, or group of hamlets, belonged to one and the same
faction but owing to the advance of civilization this principle is not
now strictly adhered to, though generally speaking the villages and
khels (clans) observe this role though there are numerous exceptions,
Even the rule against eating and smoking together bas almost
disappeared. The menials of a village belong to the faction of their
land holders. Immigrants from a village where people belong to the
other faction generally attach themselves to the faction of the people of
their new abode, but they are not compelled to do so and this freedom
seems to have led to the bhojes being divided between the two factions.
Besides this division there are smaller parties in every place or clan
but they are not established factions. They rise and sink as their
founders or leaders rise and sink. These small cliques are both
individual and collective.
Satoár, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SAThár, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Sati. See Satti.
Satiár, a Ját tribe : Punjab Census Rep., 1912, $ 585.
SATNÁMI, -íá, a class of Hindu devotees. Satnám literally means "the
true name'. It was the initiatory word given by Ram Singh Kúka to his
disciples, but the Kúkas never appear to have been so called.* The
Satnamis of the Central Provinces are said to be an offshoot of the Rai-
dási Chamárs. But they may have a much higher origin, for in the
15th year of the reign of Aurangzeb (1675), we find the Satnámis or
Mundíhs mentioned and the chroniclet says :-" It is cause for wonder
that a gang of bloody, miserable rebels, goldsmiths, carpenters, sweep.
ers, tanners, and other ignoble beings, braggarts and fools of all des-
criptions, should become so puffed up with vainglory as to cast them.
at they range de terasal demiths, crochet of
here
* It is not quite clear who the Satnámís of our census returns are. Any sikh may be called
a Satnámi, or they may be Diwánas, or they may belong to the sect of Satnámis, of
Chattisgarh, who form so conspicuous a feature in the religion of the Central Provinces.
These last were founded in the beginning of the century by a Chamár called Gházidás and
his son Bálakdás, the names of both of whom appear in our returns. But it is to be noted
that none of those who have returned “ Chamár" as their religion have entered any of
these dames as representing their sect. The Satnámis of the Central Provinces are describ.
ed as Unitarians and are said to pay excessive reverence to their gurus : E. D. M.
+ Ma'asir-i-Alamgiri, Elliot's History of India, VII, p. 185.



Satraula-Satti.
389
selves headlong into the pit of self-destruction. This is how it came to
pass. A malignant set of people, inhabitants of Mewat, collected sud-
denly as white ants spring from the ground or locusts descend from the
skies. It is affirmed that these people considered themselves immortal ;
seventy lives was the reward promised to every one of them who fell in
action. A body of about 5,000 had collected in the neighbourhood of
Nárnaul, and were in open rebellion. Cities and districts were plun-
dered.” The emperor was obliged to take the field against them in
person.
The insurgents showed a bold front and though totally unprovided
with implements of war made good use of what arms they had, and the
people of Hind have called this battle Mahabharat on account of the
great slaughter of elephants which occurred. After a desperate strug-
gle the rebels broke and fled but were pursued with great slaughter. The
Muntakhab-ul Lubáb describes the Satnámis as men who dressed like
devotees but carried on petty trade ani agriculture. They were not
allowed to acquire wealth in any but a lawful calling and would not
submit to oppression at the hands of anthority. Their rising began
with a squabble between a Satnámi and a man who was keeping watch
over the harvest, probably an appraiser. The shikkdár's forces were
overpowered and even the faujdár of Narnaul was defeated and slain
and the town fell into the hands of the rebels, who proceeded to collect
taxes from villages and establish posts of their own. Swords, arrows
and even musket-balls were said to have no effect on them and they
were credited with magical powers and witchcraft. Their wooden
men were supposed to form an advance guard mounted on magic horses
made of wood. *
The Satnámi sádhs, found in Rohtork, are described as a sect of free-
thinking Játs, founded by one Noe Dás of Farrukhábád. They observe
no ceremonies even in the disposal of the dead, but it is said that they
used in that district (and still use in Jaipur) to set a corpse up against
some tree in the jungle and leave it to be devoured by wild animals.
But they now burn it without ceremony and observe no annual or other
rites. The ashes are not taken to Hardwár. Sometimes the body is
thrown into the Jumpa or Ganges. At weddings they sing a song of
their own, and make the pair walk round the chair soven times, but a
Brahman only attends if the marriage is with a non-Sádh. Játs will
eat from their hands, but they eat only from a Sádh's hand, without
distinction of caste among themselves. They do not smoke tobacco.
The Sádhs of Rohtak are chiefly Játs and Bánias. On the last day bat
two of Phágan at the village of Mirzapur Kheri and once each new
moon they eat together. They keep the choti but wear no janeo, and
have no ceremonies when the head is first shaved.t
The methods of burial look like a revival of primitive usages.
SATRAULA, a sept of Rájputs, closely akin to the JÁTUS.
SATTI.-The largest and most important of the hill tribes in Ráwalpindi.
They occupy the hills in the Murree tahsil, south of the Dhúods, and
also those in the north-west corner of Kahúta tahsil, including the
* Elliot, op. cit., p. 294.
T|Rohtak Gazetteer, 1910, p. 60,



390
Satwahan-Sayad.
Narrar mountain. Probably of the same origin as the Dhúnds, who
pretend to look down on them, they are similar to them in physique
and general characteristics, but are distinctly of a superior class.
They make excellent soldiers. The Dhúnds' theory of the Satti is that
they are descendants of one Kalu Rai, a Dhúud, by a slave-girl. Her
son was born at the foot of the Narrar hill and abandoned by his
parents, who had lost their way, and found three days later by a fabu-
lous Brahman who called him sat or penance-whence Satti. This
genealogy is of course repudiated by the Sattis and they are generally
accepted as sáhu or gentle.' In sincerity and general character they
are distinctly superior to the Dhúnds. Tribal feeling is stronger among
them than it is with the Dhúnds and they look up to their headmen
more. According to Cracroft they claim descent from Naasbírwán,
possibly a way of saying that they are of Iranian extraction.
SATWÁHAN, a Ját clan (agricoltural) found in Multán.
SAUNAN (?), an ancient Ját tribe found in Gurgaon. It is said that " The
Saunan and Tevítá Játs are two groups which were formed of the
issue of Jadun Rájputs and women of lower castes." The Tevita appear
to be the Tewatiya.
SAUNCH, à Ját tribe which claims descent from Hari Singh, a Chaubán
Rájpat, who lost status by marrying a wife of another tribe, Thoy are
found in the Bawal nizá mat of Jínd.
SAURA-PATIA, a worshipper of Surya, the Sun-god.
Sauria, or Dasauria, a class of Brahman exorcists : see p. 140 of Vol. II.
SAWAG, a small tribe in the Leiah tahsil of Mianwali, claiming to be an
offshoot of the Khokhars. One Mián Sagoh, of that tribe, left Hájípur
in Dera Gházi Khan and settled as a hermit on the east bank of the
Indus. One of the Mirráni Baloch rulers to test him bade him subdue
a tiger. He did so and earned the title of sinh-vag, 'tiger-rein,' by his
act-whence his descendants are called Sawag. The Sawags bear the
title of Mián, and have been licensed by the Mián of Saroi, who is a
Shía, to admit murids or disciples. The Sawag were once almost
exterminated by the Hot Baloch. Marriages are usually adult and
arranged within the tribe, but intermarriage with Játs is permitted,
The Sawag do not cut the hair in any way.
SAWALAH, an Aráín clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SAWERA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Sawne, a Mabtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
SAYAD or, more correctly, Sayyid.The true Sayads are the descendants of
Ali, the son-in-law of Muhammad, and, strictly speaking, the word
includes only those descended from him by Fátima, Muhammad's
daughter. But there are Ulavi Saiyads, who are said to be descended
through other wives. Our Census tables show about a quarter of
a million Sayads in the Punjab and North-West Frontier Provinces,
but it is impossible to say how many of these are of true Sayad stock.
Certainly, an immense number of those returned as such have no real
claim to the title. The saying is, " Last year I was a Juláha ; this year



The Sayads.
391
I am a Shaikh ; next year, if prices rise, I shall be à Sayad; ” and, if
" generation” be substituted for "year," the process is sufficiently com-
mon. The Sayads are found scattered throughout these Provinces. In
the eastern half of the Punjab they form a comparatively small element
in the population, except in Delhi itself. These men for the most part,
came in with the Muhammadau conquerors or under their dynasties, and
were granted lands or revenue which their descendants still hold and
enjoy. The Bára Sa'ádát of the Jumna-Ganges doáb, with whom many
of these Eastern Sayads are connected, enjoyed considerable political
importance during the latter dạys of the Mughal empire. But directly
the meridian of Lahore is passed, the Sayads form a markedly larger
portion of the population, being largest of all on the Pathán frontier
and in the Salt Range tract, and only slightly smaller on the lower
Indus. Many of the Pathán tribes, such as the Bangash of Kohát and
the Mishwáni, claim Sayad origin. The apostles who completed the
conversion of the Patháns to Islám were called Sayads, if they came
from the west, and Shaikhs if from the east, and it is probably to the
descendants of the former, and to false claims to Sayad origin set up
most commonly in a wholly Musalmán tract, that the large number of
Sayads in the north-west is due. At the same time the Baloch,* who
were originally Shías and were called “the friends of Ali,” reverence
and respect Sayads far more than do those bigoted Sunnis the Patháns ;
and yet Sayads are more numerous among the latter than among the
former. The Sayads of Kágán who came into Hazára with Sayad Jalál
Bába hold the whole of the Kágán valley, and those of the Multán
district who occupy a prominent position will be found described at
length in Roe's Settlement Report. Sayadst and other holy men hold
the frontier races in an abject state of bondage. The Sayad is, no less
than the Brahman, a land-owner and cultivator on a large scale.
Indeed, while the Brahman is by birth a priest, or at the least a Levite,
the Sayad as such, is neither; though he makes use of his supposed
saintliness, at any rate in the west of the Punjab, to compel offerings
to which the ordinances of his religion give him no sort of claim. The
Sayad of Karuál is tbus described in Ibbetson's Settlement Report :
• The Sayad is emphatically the worst cultivator I know, Lazy, thrift-
less, and intensely igy rant and conceited, he will not dig till driven to
it by the fear of starvation, and thinks that his holy descent should save
his brow from the need of sweating. At the best he has no cattle, he has
no capital, and he grinds down his tenants to the utmost. At the worst
he is equally poor, dirty, and holy. He is the worst revenue-payer in
PHOT
* In Dera Ismail Khán where the number of Sayads is considerable, they have as usual
selected the pleasantest parts of the district for their residence. They abound in the
fat villages of the Rug.Pabárpur tract. They own all the rich villages forming the northern
portion of the Bhakkar Kachi, known after them as the Sayadát Miáni. They are
Folerably numerous all through the Bhakkar Kachi, generally holding an influential
position. The proportion of Sayads in the Leiah Kachi is much the same as in Bhakkar,
but there are fewer well-to-do men among them, and their general position is weaker.
In the Thal and in the Damáu, where life is comparatively hard, the proportion of
Savads is generally small. The lands held by them were generally acquired by grants
from old Baloch rulers, and to a less extent by gifts from individual zamindárs. Sayads
own very few villages in the Pathán tracts.
+ Among the Patháns of Swát and Dír the Sayyids, owing to their large number and
varying circumstances, are not, as such, given precedence over other spiritual denomi-
nations, but a Sayyid who becomes prominent as a religious man takes precedence
over other religious denominations.



392
Sayad divisions.
the district; for to him a lighter assessment only means greater sloth."
Mr. Thorburn thus describes the Sayads of Bannu :-
“ As a rule the Jayads are land owners, not tenants, and bad, lazy, land-owners they make
too. In luarning, general intelligence, and even in speech and appearance, they are
bardly distinguishable from the Pathans or Játs amongst whom they live. Here and there
certainly honourable exceptions are to be found. The way the lands now held by thom were
originally acquired was in most cases by gift. Though many of them still exercise
considerable influence, their hold as a class on the people at large is much weaker than it
was thirty years ago. The struggle for existence caused by the increase of population since
annexation has knocked much of the awful reverence the Pathán zamindár used to feel
towards holy men in general out of him. He now views most matters from rather a hard
worldly than a superstitious staodpoint. Many a family or community would now cancel the
ancestral deed of gift under which some Sayad's brood enjoys a fat inheritance. But for
the criminal consequences which would ensue from turning them out nock and crop, the
spiritual consequences would be risked willingly enough."
In Afghánistán the Sayads have much of the commerce in their
hands, as their holy character allows them to pass unarmed where
other Patháns would infallibly be murdered. Even the Baloch do not
love the Sayad : they say, “ May God not give kingship to Sayads and
mullahs." The Sayads, as a rule, follow the Muhammadan law of inherie
tance, and do not give their daughters to other than Sayads. But in
the villages of the east many of them have adopted the tribal customs
of their neighbours, while in the west the Hindu prejudice against
widow-marriage has in many cases extended to them.
Divisions of the Sayads.-The Punjab Sayads are primarily divided
into: Hasani descended from Hasan and Husaini descended from Husaiu,
the sons of Ali; Hasan-Husaini, the descendants of Abdal Qadir Jilani,
who sprang from an intermarriage between the two brauches ; Ulavi
desceuded from Ali by other wives than Fátima; and Zaidi who are
descended from Zaid Shahíd, a grandson of Husain. But they also have
a second set of divisions named after the places wbonce their ancestors
came. Thus the descendants of Abdul Qadir are often known as
Jilani : so the Gardezi or Bághdadi* Sayads are an important branch of
the Hasainis, and once owned a large portion of the Sarai Sidhu tahsil
of Multáu, while the Zaidis are said to be a branch of the Gardezis.
The Bukhárí Sayads seem to be of the Husaini section. The Sayads
of the Western Plains are chiefly Bukhárit and Husaini; the Giláni
Sayads are found chiefly in the centre of the Punjab and the Salt Range
and westero sub-montaue, the Shirazi iu Jhelum and Sháhpur, the
Jáfiri in Gujrát, the Husaini in Jhelum, the Bák hari in Ráwalpindi,
and the Mashaidi in the Salt Range tract. The Sayads of Ludhiana
are either Bukhárí or Sabazdári, the latter being the more numerous.
Sabazdár is a town in Persia. The Sabazdárí are descendants of
Moses, one of the 12 imams. They are usually endogamous, but
if they cannot find a suitable match in their own group they seek
one from the Bukhárí. Widow rewarriage is deprecated but not
prohibited.
* To a Bukhari Sayyid and others Batála owed its reputation for learning. His tomb still
exists in the quarter still occupied by his descendants. He flourished in the time of
Anrangzeb and later, under Farrukhsiár, Sayyid Muhammad Fazl Jiláni founded a college in
the town, but it was destroyed by Banda and the town lost its reputation for piety as well
as learning.
Shaikh Badr-ud-Din Baghdadi has a shrine at Masánian in Gurdaspur. Gurdaspur
Gasetteer, p. 63,



The Bára Sa'adát.
393
In Multán the immediate ancestor of the Bagdádi Sayyids was
Shah Habib, who founded a village, Baghdad, at the commencement of
the Sidhnai reach in Kabírwala tahsil. His shrine is still the scene
of a considerable fair in Augast. His family is also known as Hasan-
Husaini or Jilani, as is that of the Sayyids of Músa Pák Shahíd, son of
Shaikh Jabán Bakhsh or Muhammad Ghaus, who was 10th in descent
from Abdul Qadir Jiláni and migrated from Baghdad to Uch in the
middle of the 15th century.
The Bára Sa'ádát.
The origin of the Sa’ádat-i-Bára or Bahira is assigned to the Sayyid
Abul-Farah Wasiti, son of Sayyid Dá’úd or Sayyid Husain, who came
to Ghazni from Wásit at the invitation of Mahmúd of Ghazni in 389 H.
He bad four sons who settled in Chbat-Banúr (now in Pațiála), and
other villages in that part. These four sons founded as many clans,
viz., the Chhatrodi, Kondliwál, Thhenpuri and Jajnori--from the names
of the village assigned to each. Some of their descendants sottled in
Delhi, but some of these again left the court to live on their estates,
owing to their love of sport, and their present seats date from 600 or
601 X. The Sayyids who remained at the capital were called shahr.
wala and those who lived outside were called báhirwala or báhira;
whence Bára. When encamped with the emperors the Sayyid or
sirdár of each camp had nis palwal or countersign, and in after times
those words began to be used ia jest and applied to tbe men of
particular villages, so that every village is now held by a group which
has its own nick-nama.
The nicknames of the clan of each village or basti are given
below* :-
Name of Basti.
Nickname.
Sanbhalhora
Kafandoz or sewer of shrouds.
Mojbara ...
Confectioner,
Miranpur
Sheep.butcher.
Kethorah
Butcher.
Tandhora
Bhutni (she-ghost).
Khojerah
Ghost.
Kakroli ...
Dog.
Béhra ...
Chamár.
Morna ...
Oamel.
Jatwara ...
Pig.
Nagla ...
Barber.
Jánsath ...
Chirimár or bird-killer.
Chitora ...
Comic.
Kawal ...
Jariye (setter of glass or pebbles in ornaments).
Jauli ...
Teli or oilman.
Tasang
Dám.
Salarpur ...
Chutiya (fool).
Ghalibpur
He-ass.
Sodipur
She-ass.
Kolaodah
Kunjrá (green grocer).
Babari
Goldsmith
Babádarpur
... Kungar or rustic.
Bilaspur
Khumra.t
Palri
Kamangar (bow maker) or one who colours bows.
Saudhawali
Dár-ul-Himáqat (house of foolishness).
• Somewhat similar nicknames are said to be found among the Awáns, e.g. Kamína.
* mean,' Khota, a donkey' and Thag, a 'cheat,' but these are taken by P. Hari Kishen
Kaul as indicating low status, and apparently as sub-castes.
† Mill pocker,



394
Segar-Sekhu.
Name of Basti.
Nickname.
Pimbora ...
Sarai
Bathyára.
Churiyala
Manihár *
Tassar ..
Sweeper.
Sakrera ... ...
Owl.
Muzaffarnagar ... ..
... Eunuch.
These names may possibly be relics of a system of initiation into
the degrees of a secret order, and in Turkey they are paralleled in
the order of the Maulavis, in which the novice is called the scullion,
and so on. Such degrees were known to the Assassins, and their 6th
degree was that of the Mukallabi or 'dog-like', who sought out
subjects fit for conversion for the missionarios (dais), as hounds run
down game for the huntsman. The explanation that the names were
originally pass-words appears to lend support to this theory.
The Sayyids of Kurram are Shías and divided into four branches,
viz. the Fakhr-i-Alana Kaul of Kirmán, the Mir Ibrahím Kaul of
Ahmadzai, the Sayyid Ishaq family of Mahura and the Lala Gul
Kaul of Kharláchi. The first two aro attached to the Saragalla
branch of the Turis and the last two to the Chardai branch. The head
of the branch of the Fakhr-i-Alam is Mir Akbar Tirahi whose followers
are designated Mián Muríds or the Ting Gundi-the 'firm faction';
while the other three families and the other branch of the Fakhri. Alam
constitute the Drewandi or triad group and their followers are styled
Sust Gundi or 'loose faction.'
It is unusual to find low castes making free with the term Sayyid
as they do with that of Shaikh, but the Dúms or Mírásis, though not
ranked as sharif in Moslem society, arrogate that term to themselves
and aspire to the title of Mír.
SEGAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Segras, a Ját clan (agric tural) found in Multáo.
Sení, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
Sero, a Muhammadan Ját tribe found in Montgomery.
SEKAN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar:
Sekau, a Ját tribe found in Amritsar, Ludhiana, Jínd, etc. In Gujrán-
wala where they hold 20 villages, they are described as Rajputs,
claiming descent from Pewar, through an eponym Sekhu, whose great.
grandsons, Hambu, Prithu and Chahar, came to that district 17
generations ago from the Málwa country. They intermarry with all
other tribes except the 'Gonds and Bals,' which they claim as sub-
divisions of their own. They never enjoyed any political importance,
but one or two were notorious robbers till about 1794.
· In Ludhiána bowever they claim descent from Tej Pál. He had
4 sons, of whom Sadlakhan and Lakhan were twins. The former
resembled a serpent. Their mother took them with her to a cotton
field and seated Lakhan on a cot and Sadlakhan on the ground.
* Bangle maker.
† Von Hammer's Hist, of the Assassins, p 58.



Sekhu
Seoni.
395
While she was picking cotton two travellers arrived, and seeing
Sadlabhan beneath Lakhan's cot they killed him with a spear. When
their mother returned and sought Lakhan, she found that he too was
dead, so both were buried at one place. Diwan Singh, one of their
kinsmen saw them in a dream so they were regarded as martyrs,
and a matt was built at Chhappár to commemorate their death on the
spot where an annual fair is now held. After a marriage this tribe
worships the matt and plays with twigs. A sihra is also offered. The
bridegroom's forehead is marked with the blood of a goat's ear. The
offerings of the mári are given to Brahmans. But in Jind they are
said to have a jathera, one Babá Mohan, who is described as a sidh.
He used to watch his cattle at night in a jungle near Sangrúr, resting
his chia upon a stick. But once sleep overcame him and a gang of
robbers detected this and stole his cattle. They killed his dog when
it barked, but he awoke and began to fight with them. They cut off
his head, but his headless body reached Sangrur town and so he was.
considered a sidh. The tribesmen worship him at weddings and distri-
bute chapátis, cakes and porridge among the poor. His shrine, called
math, stands where he fell. They also offer the beestings of a cow or
buffalo on Monday and light a lamp at the Diwali there and present
a bheli, or piece of coarse sugar, at a child's birth. The Sekhu are also
called Sekhon or apparently Shekhon.
A branch of the Sekhu, called Sekhuké, has a sidh called Bábá
Parmanand, whose math is at Sangrúr outside the Nábka gate. It
is said that the Bábá used to graze cattle in a jungle and ouce some
boys and men followed him there, calling him a mad man, whereupon
he told them to bring two cotton wicks which he put in his eyes and
bade them look at them attentively. They did so and saw them burning
like lamps. The fame of this made him a sidh. He is said to have
been buried alive in a samadhi. They offer the first milk on Sundays and
sweetmeat at weddings and worship him at the Diwali.
SEKUN, & Hinda Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SEMI, a Ját clan (agricultoral) found in Multán.
SENOA, a class of men who had a peculiar instinct for discovering old wells.
Ferozepur Selt. Rep., 1860, p. 18. Cf. sengha, one who tells aboat
baried treasure : Panjábi Dicty, p. 1036. Cf. also Sangh, singh.
Sexí, a Ját clan (agricultaral) found in Multán.
SENARÁL, a tribe of Rajpat status found in Attock. It ranks high as it is
said to receive daughters from the Alpiáls and Gbebas.
SEONI, & section of the Khatris. It had tha management of the country
round Bajwara* in Hoshiárpur under the Mughals up to Sikh times.
It venerates three persons, Bába Chanat, Alli Jalli parohitáni, and
Jhágrá Nai. Chanat or Khidaría Brahman was the parohit of the
* But the office of Qanungo of Bajwara was held by a family of Jírath Khatris : 809
under Qanungo.



896
Sopi-Seti.
Seoni and Alli Jalli was his wife. Once upon & time a bridal procession
left the bride's trousseau behind and he went back to fetch it, but
the procession, fearful of letting the propitious hour go by, went on
without waiting for him, leaviog the barber to bring him on. The bar-
ber soothed bis anger for the time being, but he declined to act as their
priest any longer and handed that office over to his daughter's descen-
dants who were Charaun Brahmans. He bade them however worship
(or propitiate ?) bim at weddings, with Jhágra Nai who had prevented
bim from cursing them. Alli Jalli became sati when he died, 80 she is
worsbipped too. The Bába's temple is near Kalewal. All three always
get a share of all charitable gifts.' The Seoni boast that they have
never had a widow of their own commit sati, ill-treated a daughter or
committed female infanticide.
SEP, fr. sep, service rendered to the village community. The sepi or ghair
mulázim are those who work for all, not for any one in particular,
except in so far as they may be attached to a special sep or to a number,
They do agricaltural work. They are the Kumbár, Chuhra or khákrob,
scavenger, sweeper or field labourer, and Mochi. Besides specific
payment for any work they do they get certain payments and allowances
in pice and in a sbare of the prodace. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1036.
Prinsep* thus distinguishes between the sepi and the kamin in Siálkot:
"The position and perquisites of village servants have been defined.
The carpenter, blacksmith and potter are paid in grain at fixed though
varying rates. The barber and washerwan by a rate on ploughs and
wells in the Charkhari ; elsewhere in grain. They are called kamin,
in contradistinction to the Chuhfas or sweepers and Chamárs who
supply the leather, and do all menial offices, and are termed sepis,
Bazar dues or dhart are not levied in these days; but thánapati, a fee
of Re. 1, is the right of Brahmans and village bards (Mírásís) on
occasion of marriages. Sometimes house rent at the rate of 8 annas a
house is taken by the zamindárs. All other dues and cesses exacted
in Sikh times have been now abandoned."
Ser, a Gajar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsa.
SERAD, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán
SBRAI RAJPUTS, (1) a branch of the Bhatti Rajputs whose ancestor Seral
settled in Hafizábád, where they founded several villages. They are
also found in Sialkot; (2).-or Sirai, a native of Sindh, especially
northern Sindh. See Sarai.
SETH, fem. Sethan, -aní (1) & wholesale merchant or banker, (2) a title
applied generally to Parsis, Marwaris and others, (8) a section of the
Khatris : cf. Panjábi Dicty., p. 1037. Fr. Sanskr. sreşthin, a man of
consequence or president of a gaild. The authors of the Vedic Indes
appear to connect it with sri, prosperity': II, pp. 402-3. But it may
bo connected with sreni, a line or row whence probably SABÍN.
Serí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
* Aislkot Settlement Report, 1885, 8 397.



Setyah-Sewapanthi.
807
SUTYAH, an Arkin clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar..
SBORÁ, faqir of the Jain sect : cf. SAREUBA, and seori, offerings to Brabmans
and Sayyids : Karnál. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1039.
SEWA-DÁR, & bard : a faqir or a Brahman, who levies contributions on
individuals and ceases not to worry them till payment is made : Panjábi
Dicty., p. 1037.
SEWAx, see Ráthi. The word sewak, seok means a servant, worshipper,
votary or disciple ; Panjábi Dicty., p. 1037.
SEWAK DARYA.River worship is common in the south-western Punjab
and the priests of this cult are known as Thakkars. They believe
in Darya Sahib and pray to him for all they want. In the matter
of customs and ceremonies, they differ little from other Hindos. The
corresponding cult in the eastern Punjab is that of Khirr Pir, who is
worshipped equally by Bindus and Muhammadads, as the water spirit.
The worship of Zinda Kaliána is connected in some way with river
worship; indeed some maintain that Darya Sábib was & chela of Zinda
Kaliana, while others hold that Zinda Pir was a personification of the
river god, Daryá Sábib. The largest number of river worshippers is
found in Multán. .
SEWápantoí, u Sikh seot. Guru Tegh Bahadur had a personal follower,
one Kanhayá Lal & Dhamman* Khatri of Sodhrá in Gujranwala.
Originally an officer in the service of the Mughals, he became a drawer
of water to the Guru's horses and to all with him and a menial at his
table day and night. The Gurú taught him and invested him with the
seli and topi. On Guru Tegh Bahadur's death Kanhayá Lál remained
in Govind Singh's service and was with him at the siege of Anandpur,
One day he heard some one say: "O heart, love God," and accord-
ipgly in the battle that ensued he gave water to the wounded on either
side, justifying his act by a Sikh text. From his personal service
(berca) or more probably from Sowa Rám, his first disciple, his followers
are called Sewa-panthis : but in Amritsar they are known as Ådan-
Sháhis, from Adan Shah, another disciple of Kanhayá Lal, and “a
rcb banker who devoted his wealth and leisure to the propagation
of tbeir doctrines.”+ Their charity to travellers and persons in distress
is proverbial. Kanbayá Lál is said to have been commissioned by
Gurú Govind Singh to preach Sikhism in the south-west and he founded
hib first dharmsálá in the Thal or steppe of the Sind Sagar Doáb.
His followers are mainly Khatrís and Arosas of that tract and the
disciples are styled Nának-Sháhis, make ropes for a livelihood, refus.
ing all alms and oblations. I Some Sewapanthis are said to shave,
others not. They are celibate and eat and share property together.
Flesh, liquor and hemp are avoided. Their dress is white. Macauliffe
describes them as an orthodox and honourable sect who live by honest
labour.
het by a Sikh Roma, his first discipnown as Adana
* For the meaning of Dhamman see Punjab Census Rep., 1912, § 584. It appears to
be the same word as Dháman or Dhiman (wise '), a sub-caste of the Lohár-Tarkhans.
† Macauliffe, Sikh Religion, V, p. 174.
Maslagan, § 103.



898
Sewaráh-Shahid.
Another version is that Sádwal Shah was the grandson of one Some
Shah, a Cbáwala Arora of Dera Ismail Khan who was treasurer
(sháh) to Guru Arjan.
SEWARAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SEWÁRI, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SAÁFia, one of the four great schools of doctrine of the Sunni Muhammdans.
Described by Mr. Maclagan as “ founded by Muhammad-ibn-Idrís-ash-
Sháfi (died A.D. 819), though found more generally in North Africa,
Arabia, Ceylon, and the Malay Peninsula, but also not uncommon in
Northern India. The founder of the sect was noted for his opposition
to the scholastic divines and drew a distinction between the funda-
mental traditions and others. In practice, however, the difference
between his school and that of the Hánifis is mainly that in prayer
the former place their hands on their breasts, and the latter on their
navel. Imam Shafi is also said to have declared the alligator to be
lawful food (halál).” Three hundred persons who returned their
religion as Sánsí for this reason gave their sect as Shafi in 1891. See
also KEHAL.
Soán, fem, Sháhní, (1) a rich merchant, usurer, banker, trader, etc.; (2) a
title assumed by certain orders of faqirs, and especially by Sayyids ;
(3) a king. In the Punjab the word is used in the sense of financial
overlord and a cultivator speaks of his sháh as his banker and master.
Cf. the proverb Shah bin pat nahin, guru bin gat nahin, 'No credit
without a sháh and no salvation without a gurú.' See Panjabi Dicty.,
p. 1039. The word is possibly connected with Sanú.
credi
Soe Panii
sibly connected gurú.
Spánbást, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
SAÁH DAULATÁNA, a Sayyad clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Søsaid, as applied to Sikhs the term Shahíd means “ martyr," just as it
does in the case of Muhammadans, but among the former it is confined
to the disciples and followers of Dip Singh and Sada Singh. Dip
Singh was a Khára Ját of Pohovind or Pohupind in Lahore and became
one of the Rhálsa's earliest adherents. At Damdama he acquired
learning, and Sada Singh became his disciple. At this time the
imperial governor of Lahore had set a price upon the Sikhs' heads
but Díwán Kaura Mal Khatrí* warped them of an impending attack.
Díp Singh dismissed all his followers who had earthly ties and but
sixty men remained with him. With these he encountered the imperial
troops till all the Sikhs had fallen, Díp Singh continuing to fight even
after his head had been struck off. Thereby he earned the title of
Shahíd, and the imperial governor, alarmed by a dream, sought his par.
don and bestowed Popupind in jágir upon bis sister Málán. The place
where she burnt the bodies of the fallen is still known as the Shahid
Búngá, at Amritsar. Other accounts connect the story with Sadá
* Made Díwán by Shab Nawaz Khán in 1747, confirmed by Mír Mannú in 1748 and
killed in battle in 1752.



nized on an his occuerdings
ked as relation to Weaving canowo Musalmst
Sháhikhel-Shaikh.
399
Singh and make Karm Singh and Dharm Singh, Sindhú Játs, his
disciples.*
· Among Muhammadans the term is applied not only to a martyr for
the faith, but also to anyone killed or executed, provided he does not
speak after receiving his death-stroke.t In popular hagiolatory the
term is frequently confused with Sayyid.
SHÁHIKHEL, & sweeper or grave-digger (also called musalli) in Pesháwat.
In Chach Hazára and along the banks of the Indus he is a gypsy
who lives by making mats and baskets of reeds and wicker-work.
SHánye, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SHAIKH.-Shaikh is an Arabic word meaning an elder or chief, and probably
corresponds very closely among the tribes of Arabia with chaudhri
among those of the Punjab. Thus the title should properly be confined
to, and is very generally assumed by, tribes of true Arab descent. But
it has been degraded to a much more vulgar use. If a Rájput or Ját
turn Muhammadan he retains his caste name, and is still a Rájput or
Ját; though Sir Denzil Ibbetson had known Musalmán Rájputs who
had fallen in life and taken to weaving call themselves Shaikhs, though
still recognized as relations by their brethren of the village whence
they came. So if an outcast or man of impure calling becomes
Musalman and retains his oocupation, or at least substitutes for it
another oply slightly less degrading, he also retains his caste name
or is known by an entirely now one, such as Díndár or Musalli. But
the class which lies between these two extremes, and are neither so
proud of their origin as to wisb, nor so degraded by their occupation as
to be compelled, to retain their original caste name, very generally
abandon that name on their conversion to Islám and adopt the title of
Shaikh. There is a Persian proverb: "The first year I was a weaver
(Juláha), the next year a Shaikh. This year if prices rise I sball be
& Sayad. Moreover many of the inferior agricultural Musalmán
tribes of Indian descent have, especially in the west of tbe Province,
set up a claim to Arab origin; and though they are still known by
their tribal name, probably or almost certainly return themselves as
Shaikhs in a Census. I
Shaikhs do not bear the best of characters in some parts. In
Rohtak they are suid to “supply recruits to our armies and jails with
praiseworthy indifference," and in Dera Ismail Khán the Naumuslim
Shaikhs are described as “a lazy thriftless set of cultivators." The
Shaikhs thus described are of course to be sharply distinguished from
the true QURAISA of the south-west Punjab. .
According to Monckton the term Shaikh is applied loosely to an
extraordinary number of Musalmán artizans and others of similar
status in Gujrát. The following list contains all these miscellaneous
* D. G. Barkley in P. N. Q. II, § 1110; cf. Griffin's Punjab Rájás, pp. 46 and 47, and
Wynyard's Ambála Settlement Report, $ 83.
† P. N. Q. 1, § 517.
. A village of Gaur Brahmans in Gurgaon, who are said to have been forcibly converted
to Islám by Aurangzeb, call themselves Gaur Shaikhs but are known to their neighbours
as GÁRA: P. N. Q. 1, § 25. In that District a family of Bánias bears the title of Shaikh
because one of its members adopted it to save its estates from confiscation under the
Mughals, but his descendants were re-admitted into Hinduism : ib. § 11. It is also affected
018 a title by the Methla Játs of Mandoswála in the Lower Deraját : vb. II, § 9,



900
The Shaikhs.
They are mostly residents of the town, or are village
Shaikhs.
servants :
No. 1
Caste or designation.
Remarks
.
Hind. Balábar.
Batwal or Vatwalt
2 Bhati*
3 Beldar or Od.
4 Kashmiri ...
5 Qanungo
6 Ohamrang
Ohiroa ...
8 Ohápegar
9 Ohimba. ...
10 Darzi
11 Dáhi*
12 | Dohli
13 Dhári
14 Dabgar ...
16 Fíwán ...
16 Gagra ...
17 Ghariála ...
18 Hajám ...
19 | Haimái ...
Jatkáta* ...
Jhiwar* ...
Juláhá* ....
Leather tanners (Khatík).
Red dyers.
Cloth printer,
Hind. Dhobi, washerman.
Hind. Gaddi or milkman.
Drummers.
Bards.
Make kuppas, Hind. kuppawala,
Elephantmen.
Hind. Boriaháf, mattress.
Moulders.
Sweetmeat men.
Fr. jat, wool or body hair, and katta, spinning.
some reinain Hindus, and are called Mogh, Hind.. Koli
(weavers).
Formerly Khatris.
Also called Bullodee (Bile ladle).
Butchers.
Hind. Khoja (eunuch).
Tinmen..
Millers (kkarásh, a large corn grinding stone turned by a
bullock).
Brick makers.
Khoja
Kakezai ...
Kasái ...
Khattík ...
Khúara ...
Kalaigar ...
Kharáshi ...
Kumhár
Kanjar ...
Kambob...
Kalávat ...
Koftgar
Qalandar*
85° Kasaora
Kághazi ...
Lohár* ...
Lilári ..
Máski* ...
Musalli ...
Mochi*
Máchi or Nánwai*
43 Mírásí
44. Mihmár ... ...
45 Mallah ...
46 Musaver ...
47. Niyária
48 | Naichaband
Green-grocers.
Fiddlers.
Enamel workers or gilders.
A class of itinerant beggars.
(Mostly Hindus), kási workers, brasa workors, old pot buyers.
Paper.manufacturers,
Iron-workers.
Bind. Rangrez.
Hind. Bhisti or Saqqa.
Proselytized Chubšás.
Hind, Bhatiára, a section of the Jhiwars.
(Hindus). Bhat or Rai or Dom.
Hind. Ráj, masons.
Boatmen.
Painters.
Refiners,
Hind. Nochagar, hooka-tube makers and binders.
+ In Mandi the batwál is one who puts weights in the scale when salt is being weighed
apparently a weighman : Gazetteer, p. 51.
* The clasees marked with an asterisk are not admitted by others as Shaikhs, some of
them will assert themselves to be Shaikhs, some are only emerging from obsourity and
beginning to be styled Shaikh. The rule in fact has no limits. I have therefore included
all the miscella 1eous Musalman classes in the above table.



Shaikh Bhangi-Shalmáni.
401
No. 7
Caste or designation.
Remarks.
.
49- Nakárchi*
50 Ulma
51 | Phuleri or Attár ...
52 Perna* ...
53 Pakkiwálá
54 | Penji*
Pattoi
56 Ráín* .
57 Rabábi* ...
Ráwal ..
Shánågarh
Sarwán*
Tarkhán ...
Teli .no
Thathiar ...
Vangáli* ...
65 Zargar
Nakára, musician.'
Mu'allam, Malwána, Maulavi, Musjid officials.
Hind. Gándhi.
Occupation of Bázigar, juggler. Hind, madári.
Hind. Dhunna, cotton cleaners.
... Hind. Patwa silk-weavers, cordings, etc.
Formerly Hindus, Mális or Bághwáns.
Fiddlers.
Aind. Baid or Hakím, Doctors.
Combmakers, Kangigars.
Cumelmen.
Carpenters.
Oilmen.
Hind. Tathera, metal workers or braziers.
| Make vanga or bracelets. Hind. maniár.
Goldsmiths.
SHAIKE, a title among Tarkháng in Dara Ghai Khán.
SHAIKH BAANGI, or SHAIKARÁ. A class of Muhammadan Chuhțás found in
Delhi who say that they accompanied the Moslem invaders from
Arabia. But see Lálbegi. .
SHAIKH KSEL, a non-Pathán sept found, with the Mandezai, Senzai and
Khwazázai in Jandol (Bájaar), said to be of Káfir descent, but now
reckoned as Patháps.
Spike Simlání, a Sayyad clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SHAJRÁ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in the Shujábád ta hsil of Multán
and said to be akin to the Bhuttas, q. v.
SHALMÁNI, SAILMÁNI.-A. Tájik tribe, erroneously styled Dibgán (lit.
husbandman) found in the Pesbáwar valley. Raverty says they came
from Shalmán (now Shalozán) and Kaſman in the Kurram valley, and
obtained the district of Ashnagbar, now Hashtnagar, becoming subjects
of the Jahangiri Sultán, Awes, of Swát. This tract they lost when
the Yúsafzais and Mandar Patháns cverran it and they are now reduced
to a few small villages in the hills round, the Tahtára Koh and chiefly
employed in navigating rafts between Jalálábád and the Peshawar
valley. Raverty says they were divided into 3 septs, Gabari not from
gabr, a fire-worshipper), Mutráwi and Mumíáli. Their rulers were
descendants of the Jahangiri Sultáns (Bahrám and Pakhal) who held
all the country north of the Kábul river from the Tagáo to the Pír
Panjál range and likewise some parts on the south bank of the Kábul
as far south as the Sufed Roh. Sultán Awes was the Gabari Sultán
of Swátt In Hazára the Shilmáni appear to have adopted the name of
# The classes marked with an asterisk are not admitted by others as Shaikhs, some of
them will assert themselves to be Shaikhs, some are only emerging from obscurity and
beginning to be styled Shaikh. The rule in fact has no limits. I have therefore included
all the miscellaneous Musalman classes in the above table,
† Tabaqát-j.Násiri, p. 1044.



402
Shalolin Shamsi.
Sulaimani. They live mostly in the Khálsa tract of that District, and
are closely connected with the Utmánzais.
SHALOLI, an agricultural clan found in Shabpur.
SHAMBÁNI, a small Baloch sub-tuman, classed also as a clan of the Bagti.
It occupies the hills adjacent to them and the Mazári.
Søámpási, a follower of Shám Dás or Shamji, the Bairagi revivalist of the
South-West Punjab: see under Chbabílwála, Vol. II, p. 158.
SHámí, a corruption of Swimi, Sansk, for “ Lord.” It is used as a term
of respect for Bairágí elders.
SHAMMOZAí, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery. It appears
to be a Yúsufzai sept.
Shamor, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery
and Multán.
Shamsí. (1) A curious sect, followers of Pir Shams Tabríz, the great
saint of Multán. Tois saint has a reputation in all parts of the
Punjab and among persons of all creeds, more especially for having
been flased alive and being able to walk about with his skin in his
hand. But there is in the north of the Province a sect which is in
some special way devoted to the cult of this saint. It gives alms in
the name of its Pir; it worships no idols, but reverences the Bhagavat
Gita, and is usually held in abhorrence by orthodox Hindus. It is
popular among the Supárs, Thathiárs and Jhínwars, more especially
among the Sunárs who give to the sect the same flavour of secrecy
and uncanniness wbich they give also to the Shaiya rites so
common among them. There is reason to believe that the sect is
closely connected with that of the Khojas of Bombay, of whom the
Agha Khán is the spiritual head. The Shamsís are not found in any
numbers east of the Jhelum. It is worth mentioning in this connec-
tion, though it has little or nothing to do with the sect of Shamsís as
such, that a remarkable fair is held every year in bonour of Shah
Shams at Shekhpur, near Bhera, in the Shahpur district, where the
sick and ailing from all parts of the Province present themselves at
the appointed time to be bled by the barbers of Bhera. These worthies
are said to do their work with great efficiency, and the whole neigh-
bourhood is soon reeking with horrid rivulets of human blood.*
P. Hari Kishen Kaul says that the Shamsis follow the Imám,
for the time being, of the Ismailia sect of Shias, their present
leader being H. H. the Agha Kbán of Bombay. They belong mostly
to the Sunár caste and their connection with the sect is kept a
secret, like Freemasonry. They pass as ordinary Hindus, but their
devotion to the Imám is very strong, and it is said that it is based
op an unspeakable faith in the efficacy of the blessings of the
Imám by way of enhancing illicit gain in the customary practices of
the goldsmith guild. The goldsmith alloys his gold by night. The
Sun is, therefore, supposed to be the exposer of his misdeeds. Shah
Shams Tabríz is known to have had the Sun under his control and the
eagerness to please his successor may, therefore, be due to the desire to
be screened from the adverse attitude of the Sun to their professiona!
em that of the Bhole Shamsis are in this compete
* This is Maclagan's account.



Sas
Shámye-Sheorán.
403
misconduot. The instructions of the creed are issued in a novel
alphabet (which is probably a secret code) by H. H. the Agha Khan,
who is said to represent an incarnation of the Hindu Trinity. The
Shamsis appear to be most numerous in Sialkot. The followers of the
sect are looked down upon by both the orthodox and advanced Hindus,
because it is believed that their secret teachings aim at a gradual
subversion of the very instincts of their original religion, and it is
possible that some of the Shamsis may have concealed their connection
with the sect.
Ibbetson says that the Shamsis also reverence Sakhi Sarwar; but in
spite of a strong leaning towards the tenets of Muhammad, they
conform to most of the observances of Hinduism and are accepted as
Hindus by their Hindu neighbours. They are chiefly drawn from the
artisan and menial castes, though a good many Khatris are said to
belong to the sect. They bury their dead instead of burning them.
Some time ago, when the Agha Khán, the spiritual head of the Bombay
Khojas, visited the Punjab, some of this persuasion openly owned
themselves his disciples, and declared that they and their ancestors had
secretly been Musalmáns by conviction for generations, though con-
cealing their faith for fear of persecution. These men were of course
promptly excommunicated by the Hindu community.
(2). A Sayad clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar,
SRÁMYs, a Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SHANKí, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SHEKHON, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar, doubtless the same aus
the Sekhu or Sekhon.
SHEKH RA, a Ját clan (agricultural) ſound in Multán.
SABIKA. The only Muhammadan tribe in the hills are Sheikhs who came
up from Basi, Rupar and Kharar. The reason of their migration is
said to be this, that originally they were Hindus, but the king who
ruled at that time converted them to Muhammadanism by force. Somo
members of a family remained Hindus, while others turned Muhainma.
dans. The converts gave up their share of the property in favour of
their brothers, and they themselves came and settled in this part of
the country, and lived by trade. Their settlement in the hills does
not seem to be older than twenty-two or twenty-four generations.
SHEORÁN, a tribe of Játs. It holds 42 villages in the Dadri tahsil of Jind
and its canton is called the Sheorán tappa. But it holds a number
of villages in Loháru and a few in Hissar also. The Sheorán got claims
descent from Sheora and Samathra, two Chauhán Rájputs who migrat-
ed from Sambhar and settled at Sidbu in Loháru State. They fouuded
villages and their descendants held a chaurási or a group of 84 villages,
52 in what is now the State of Loháru and 32 in tabsil Dádri, but the
number of villages is now about 100 all told. Froin the Sheorán are
descended the Dhankar, Dbáká, Tokas, Jábar, Kundu, Rámpuria,
and Phogát septs of the Jáțs.
The Loháru account of the tribe is more detailed and differs in some
respects from that given above, which comes from Jind. According



404
The Sheorán Játs.
to it the Sheorán are also styled Chauhan Teli. Mím, a Chauhan
Rájput, left Sambhar with his sons, Lumra and Sheora, owing to &
family quarrel and went to Darerá, a village in Bikáner State. After
a time the Sungra Rájputs, who were rulers of Darerá, drove Mím
out of their lands, so he settled in Hissár. There another quarrel
ensued with the Játú Rájputs, tbe original inhabitants of that place,
because .a bullock belonging to Mim had damaged the Játús' fields
and they wounded it with an iron weapon. Sheora and Lubra came
to Sadhanwa, in Loháru, which was then desolate ; while in that
desert a wheel of the cart loaded with their luggage broke and so
Sidhnáth, a Hindu sage, who lived there and spent his life in medita-
tion bade them settle in that place and told Sheora to look all
around him. Casting his glance to the east he saw a hill now in
Dádri, to the west a pípal tree where the town of Bhal now stands,
to the south a pípal where Chhapra a village in Jaipur now lies.
The sage promised him the conquest of all the country extending
up to the hill and pípal trees. Sheora then asked how they were
to get children as their women had all been slain iu the fight with
the Játús, sọ the sage bade him take his rosary to a Ját of the
Súrá tribe who dwelt in Balsamand, a village in Hissár, as he had a
blind daughter whom he would marry to Sheora on seeing the roaary.
Sheora in dus course married the blind girl, and their descendants are
the Sheorán Játs, though Sheora was a Rajput. Lumra's descendants
were also called Sheorán. This occurred about 31 generations ago.
The tomb of Sidh Náth is inside the walls of Sadbanwa and it is
said to be at the very place where Sheora and Lumra first met
the saint. Fagirs of Sidh Náth's family-live there and the Jáțs put
much faith in them, payiug them a rupee at every wedding and
supplying them with food. Widow remarriage is allowed, but a widow
cannot marry her husband's elder brother. They worship all the Hindu
gods, but'the Sun is their bighest deity, and they believe that he saves
thein from all calamities. They also worship Ráma, Hanúmáu, Bhatian
Sidh, Masáni and Shámji..No day is sacred to Ráma, but Hanúmán is
worshipped on Tuesday. Chúrma (a kind of food made of jaggery, ghi,
wheaten flour, etc.) is offered in his worship. A Hingú faqir is first
fed with it and then the Sheorán themselves eat of it. Bhatían is
worshipped on the 14th of the lunar mouth, food made of the same
ingredients being first given to a Dúm. Bhatian is believed to protect
them from epidemics such as cholera, etc. Sidh is worshipped on
Mondays, porridge of bajrá made on this occasion being given first
to a Kumhár, a Kumhár being in high fuyour with Sidh because the
ass is used by the godling as his conveyance. Asses too are fed at the
worship of Sidh. He protects cbildren from small-pox.* Masádí is
worshipped on Wednesday, large cakes of wheat Aour, jaggery and
ghi being first given to a Kumhár. The offerings made to Masání are
also taken by Kumhárs. Shamjí is worshipped on the 12th of the
lunar month. Khír. (made of rice and milk) and porridge are given
first to a Brahman, who also takes the offerings made to Shamji; all
the milk that the cattle yield is used in making the khír. Those who
: * This reads like a confused account of Shiva worship, Shiva being personified in a
Kumhár because he creates things out of earth, and of Devi worship, she being the goddess
of small-pox.



Sheoráni-Shin.
405
worship Shamjí abstain from flesh and wine. The worship of Bhatian,
Masání and Sidh ia peculiar to women and children.
SA BORÁNI, se Shiranni.
SABRÁNI, see Shiranni.
SA ERKE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SHERKRÁNÁNA, a Baloch clan (agricultural) foond in Montgomery.
SHEBUẢNA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Saiál, a sept of the Awáns, descended from Malik Sbíhán (latter hall of
the 18th century), found in Pind Dádan Khán tahsil.
SHIKÁRI, a tribe found only in the Sád igabád Kárdári of Baháwalpur. They
are Mubammadans only in name, though some observe Mühammadan
rites, for they eat food disallowed by the shará, even the flesh of
dead animals and pork. They make small buts in the environs of
towns and live by hunting, protecting crops, labour and occasionally
cultivation.
SAIN, a tribe widely spread throughout the Indus valley, in the Kohistán,
and as far to the north as Båltistán.* The part of the Indus Valley
below Gor to the Afgbán limits near Ghorband is called Shin-kári and
in its lower part the purest Shin community is probably to be now
found, but the name Sbin-kári still exists in Pakhli and their original
bome was possibly in that valley.
The Shins form the majority of the population in Gor, Chilás, Tangir,
the Indus valley below Sazin, and the upper part of the Gilgit valley
above Ponyál, but they are not found at all in the higher and less fer-
tile parts till one gets further up the Indus valley beyond Haramosh.
Though numerically inferior their language is established to the ex-
clusion of others where they have penetrated and thev doubtless repre..
sent a conquering race.
Shins give daughters to Ronos and Sayyids, but cannot obtain wives
from them. On the other hand, they marry Yeshkun women, but do
· not give them daughters, though they do so to Nimchas in the lower
Indus valley. Those of the Indus valley below Sazin are small clean-
limbed men, with dark eyes and complexion, and sharp features of a
type not uncommon in North-Western India. A rare type is small
and slight with thin sharp features, prominent noses and narrow ohing.
It is possibly due to degeneration cansed by long and close. inter-
marriage.
* The Shias probably had once an internal organization which is preserved by the Brok-pag
of Baltistán, who are undoubtedly Shins by origin and speak various dialects of Shina.
The Baltis term all classes of the Brok-pas Shina or Shinalok, but they call themselves
Rom and say they belong to the Shin .caste' of Gilgit, Astor, eto. They are divided into
foar sub-castes :- Sharsing, Gabúr, Doro and Yudoy, which all intermarry and are canal in
overy respect. The Roms will not however intermarry with the Yoshkun. Biddulph's
Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh, p. 72.4.



406
Shin customs.
Though no longer, even traditionally, a separate race the Shins
regard themselves as an aristocracy, considering it a disgrace to
carry loads and only condescending to hunting and agriculture, But
in Baltistan they are subordinate to the Tartars, who style them
Brok-pas or highlanders because they cultivate the highest and least
fertile lands.
In all the Shinkári republics slavery is a recognised institution-
prisoners taken in war and children of slave parents forming the servile
class.
Among the Shios marriage between first cousins, or other relatives
within that degree (such as uncle and niece), is strictly prohibited,
though allowed by Mubammadan Law.
... The most remarkable characteristic of the Ships is their feeling with
regard to the cow, & point to which Drew first called attention. In
spite of their conversion to Islam this feeling is still maintained in
Nágar, Gilgit, A.stor, and the Indus valley above Búnji. In that valley
below Astor the feeling has died out, but in the places mentioned
orthodox Shins will not eat beef, drink milk or touch & vessel contain-
ing it.* A sucking calf, or any portion of a dead animal, is especially
unclean, so that purification is necessary if even the garments chance
to touch it. It is not unusual for a Shin to make over his cow and
calf to a Yeshkun neighbour, to be restored to him when the calf is
weaned. Shins also regard the domestic fowl as unclean.
Of the Shin names a great number have the suffix Singh,' which is
retained in spite of their conversion to Islám. Biddulph gives a list of
the names used with the suffix and also of women's names which some-
times have the suffix · Bai.'t But fow of these names are now found in
the Punjab.
The Shins are noted for their miserly habits which they carry to
extremes. Every man bas a secret hiding place in the mountains where
he keeps his money, metal pots, wife's jewels and all his most valuable
property. This treasure is never taken out for use, except on festive
occasions. No feeling of honour exists as to the appropriation of
another's treasure if it is discovered by chance. A treasure is frequently
lost altogether by the owner's sudden death before he has had time to
confide the secret of its hiding place to his son, and the Shins have
many legends of lost treasures guarded by demons.
In the Indus valley about Shinkári the men wear turbans and tight
fitting clothes, and retain the curious leather leggings called tauti
which are peculiar to the Shina-speaking tribes and those of Torwal
and Bashkár.
* This feeliog regarding the cow exists 'also among the Brok-pas of Baltistan and points
to their kinship with the Shins of Gilgit. It is also incumbent on a dainyál or witch, of
whatever caste, to refrain from cow's milk ; Biddulph, op. cit., p. 98. Novo says that the
Brokpa consider it contaminating to touch a cow.
| Biddulph, op. cit., p. 99.



Shinwari Shiranni.
407
Biddulph suggested that the Mubammadan Brokpa whose seats are
lower down the Indus than the other Brokpas, settled in the Dah-Hann
tract, are descendants of Shín captives settled there by Rája Ahmad
Shah of Skardo in the 17th century after his wars with the Shin
peoples of Gilgit, but Neve agrees with Francke in regarding them as
Nards, like the Buddhist Brok pa of that district.* Their dialect, how- '
ever, proves an age-long separation from the Dards of Astor and Gilgit.
The Buddhist Brokpa have a kind of caste system, First come the
Lhabdak or priestly caste,t then the Rüshens, then the Ruzmets.
Eating with people of a different caste causes ceremonial uncleanness
which is removed by fumigating oneself with the smoke of the cedar
before re-entering one's house. The goddess Shiring is a great spirit
dwelling in the mountains, and to her are given the first-fruits of the
fields and apricot-trees. But Hanu has a special god in Zan Dan
Lha-mo, and Garbon village in Kaņ Lha-mo. These Brokpas were con-
verted to Buddhism only half a century ago by Lamas sent by the king
of Ladák, and their anónal festival is both unlike the Bon festival of
that country and anything in Hinduism, though the dancing, in which
the sexes are separated, reminds one of similar festivals in Kulu and,
other Himalayan tracts. The people gather round & stone-altar under
a walnut-tree, and on the altar a small fre of the sacred cedar is kept
burning while the dancers perform. Shiring is worshipped at this
festival. It appears to be the l'aleni or torch festival described by
Biddulph as celebrated at the winter solstice.
SHINWÁRI, a Pathán tribe, already described at p. 236 suprū.
The eastern Ali Sher sections are the Khuja or Khwája, Shaikhmal,
Asba, Pirwal ard Pisat. The Manduzai are divided into 3 khels,
Hamza, Iliás and Hasan, and the Sanga and Sináh thus :-
Ghani Khel,
Mai Khal.
Haidar Khel.
Sanga ... { Khani.
Kachkoh.
Adil.
Sanga ... Mir Jan.s
(Haidar Khol.
Tsalorphára.
Sipah ... {Babar Khel.
Mullagori
(Rahánad Khel.
Karmu.
SHIRANNI, Shirani, Sheráni, Sheoráni, or as it prefers to call itself Marani,
a Pathán tribe, whose history has already been given at p. 224 supra.
As stated on p. 228 they occupy the country round the Takht-i-
Sulaiman. Mr. L. White King divides them into two main groups, the
Bargha or highland and the Largha or lowland. The origin of the
name is obscure but Farishta mentions Shiwarán as a country on the
* Thirty Years in Kashmir, pp. 108—6.
† The priests are Mongolian and seem to be connected with the monasteries at Skir.
bichan, having little to do with the Brokpas of Dah-Hanp beyond collecting' alms from them.:
ibid. p. 106.
I The Ali Sher sections are also given as Khuja* Khel, Mirdad Khel, Shaikhmal, Asha,
Piro Khel, Pisat, Ahotar or Watar and Pakhal.
$ The Mir Ján are said to be Ghilzai by origin and V&Anaís of the Sanga.



408
Shiranni pedigree.
borders of the Punjab.* They occupy one of the earliest, if not the
earliest seat of the Afgháns. Their pedigree is given below :-
Ismail Ghorgasht.
Qais, Abdur-Rashid.
Ibrahim, Sarban.
Dapai.
Sharf-ud-Din, Bharkhabun.
Kekar.
Daughter, mothor of Shorin. Tarin. Miána. Baraich. Amr-ud-Día
(Urmar).
Dzár, a sacrifice or oblation or a thing consecratod.
Dom or Dam.
Jalwani.
Harpágil, corrupted into Haripal (also said
to be a grand son of Dzár).
.
Babar.
Umar.
Saidani
Milna, the widow of Sayyid Tabáq.
Six sons, including
Hamim or Jamim
Aiso adopted Kapír
Kapipxai.
-
laughter married Muhammad-i-Gion Daráz Daughter married Sayyid Ishaq
of Ush.
of Ush.
Ushtaránas.
Habib, Abu Bai'a, Bakhtyar.
Gandapur.
Ato.
Sayyid Muhammad.
Khwaja Niss.
Makhdum-i. Alam, the Khwaja.
Yahya-i-Kabir, Bakhtyar, died 1784 H.
(LABS, A.D.)
Shaikhzais.
White King gives the following list of the Shiranai olans:--
-
Division.
Sub-divisions.
Sections,
Sub-sections.
Ahmad sai
Hassan Khel
1. Yagozai.
Karammaizai.
(2. Anozai,
11. Sbarbozai.
|| 2. Saksai,
Heasi
Karmanzai.
Khiddarzai
Mamaizai
Ahmadzai
"Bargha
...
Uba Khel ...
..
Yahyazai.
Senaisai,
Chuhar Khel
...
Sulaimánzai
Barakzai.
Kudanzai.
Hassanzai.
Selikansai.
• Brigg's Forishta, I, p. 7.



Shiranni sections.
409
Diyinion.
Sub-divisions.
Sections.
Sab-sections.
Hezai
...
1.-Shozai.
2. Márufzai.
3. Desalzai.
4, 8ákzai.
6. Barakzai.
6. Khalilzai.
Hassan Khol
Ahmadzai ...
saintiso sa
Ismailzai.
Hassanzai.
Danlatzai
Istarakzai.
Jamálzai.
Haidarzai,
Misni
Hassan Khel.
2. Brahim Khel.
||Land Abmad
1. Shakarzai.
2. Brahimzai,
3. Gadazaj.
4. Mirzai.
5. Anizai,
6. Tukaraizai.
Isagai
Largha
.....
1. Niyamatzai.
| . Shadizai.
3. Muhammadzai.
4. Shibizai.
5. Bakizai,
16. Waryazai.
117. Hozai.
(1 8. Bibizai.
Mamanzai ... ... Sultansai.
Sayads of Khaisara, Bakhari.
Uha Khol
Shibizai ir
Pirakzai
38. BAbarzai,
8. Chikari.
Muhammadzai
(1. Hazarzai.
2. Kamardinzai.
Salim Khánzai.
4. Jlhain.
Rozai
c/1: Hezai.
Isazai and Mamezai 31 2. Músarai,
Ismailzai,
$11. Sheikh.
Akhmad ...
2. Khiddarzai.
Mamai
...
1. Sultánzai.
%. Hubammadan
8. Umarzai.
14. Kánunzai.



410
· Shiranni customo
Division.
Sub-divisions.
Sections.
Sub-sections.
Bahrámzai
mi coco in corso
Bahrimsai.
Lalakzai.
8. Khinai.
Jamálzai.
Mamanzai.
Karozai.
Naurozai.
8. Baizai
Largha
..
..
Chuhar Khel
Allahdıdzal
1. Ababa krzai,
8. Suleimanzai.
Bezai.
Baizai.
Allahdadzai.
Payosai.
Xarhols
...
Ibrahimzai.
8. Abdur Rahmenzai.
Hárúnzai.
Kamilzai.
SOCIAL Custo28.
Birth.-The birth of a son is announced by the firing of guns. Sheep
are slaughtered and the meat distributed on the third day, as a rule, in
the mosque or village chauk. The infant receives its name on the third
day, as a role, and in exceptional cases on the seventh day. The child
is named either by the eldest male member of the family or by some
friend nominated by the father. The bang or formula of faith is not
repeated in the child's ear as is the case with other Muhammadans.
The child is generally given a cap or turban to wear after he bas com.
pleted his seventh year. Ciroumcision is, as a rule, performed when
the child is ten years old. No rejoicings of any kind take place on
the birth of a femalo ohild
Betrothal.-Op the child's attaining the age of puberty the father
looks out for a suitable matoh for him. The father or legal guardian of
the girl sought in marriage fises the amount for which he is willing to
bestow her hand, and if the parties agree, the contract is made. Should
a différence arise mutual friends are called in to use their good offices
and bring about a settlement. Some Rs. 3 or 4 are generally paid as
Barnest-money, the balance being given afterwards. The marriage,
however, cannot be celebrated until the whole amount is paid up. An
exchange of girls is also sometimes effected, in which case no money is
passed on either side. The Shiránnís have a saying that by receiving
money for their daughters they sell their flesh, but not the bonos, or 'in
other words, that the husband is entitled to chastise his wife or inflict
any budily injury upon her, but is not at liberty to kill her. The amount
paid for å girl varios a good deal, as follows :-
Sultánzai
.. ... Bs. 80 to 840
Other Uba Khols
... » 100 to 600
Hassan Khels
... , 200 to 700
Chubar Khola ...
100.00 400



Shiranni customs.
In deciding the amount the personal attractions of the girl and the
pusition and wealth of the parents are taken into consideration.
Marriage. The marriage is not celebrated until the betrothed
parties are fully grown up, or generally until the bridegroom is 20 and
the bride 16 years of aga. An exception to this rule is said to be
unknown. The relations and friends of the couple are invited to the
wedding. Some of those that can afford it bring sheep and thus con-
tribute their quota to the marriage feast. In return they are given
a lungi or Rs. 3 or 4 in cash on leaving. The drum and sarangi are the
only instruments used on the occasion.
The women sit apart and sing songs while the male guests perform
the sword dance, tha jhummar, round a bonfire. The marriago expen-
diture is not excessive, not amountiog to more than from Rs. 10 to 120,
according to the position of the parties. It is ourious to note that
among the Hassan Khels the girl is given no voice in the marriage
contract, though in other sections of the tribe she is nominally consulta
ed and generally names the mulláh as her representative.
is given het is curious to 10 to 120,
na mobber section
Dowry.--Household utensils, clothes, and cattle to the value of
from one-fourth to one-half of the amount received from the parents of
the bridegroom are given as a dowry with the bride.* Bat haq.mahr,
or the bride's dower which is settled on her, does not exist. Åt best
it is agreed in rare cases that one-fourth of the alms given by the hus.
band shall be considered as the wife's gift.
Divorce.Is usually a repurchase of the wife by her father or
guardian, who repays, as a rule, not more than one-half the net sun
(less the dowry) received for her. If the parent or guardian declines
to take back the woman, the husband divorces her and drives her
from his house. She is then not allowed to livə in the tribe, and must ::
go elsow bere. But if any one else remarries her he must pay compen. ::
sation to her parents (Rs. 40 and two bullocky or cows), and also pay the ::
husband what he would have received had her parent or guardian
repurchased her. Divorce is consummated by throwing three clods of
earth after the woman.
Widow marriage. On the expiration of three months after her bus.
band's death a Shiranni woman is at liberty to remarry with the oon-
sent of her husband's representative, who is entitled to a sum of from
Rs. 60 to 300 on the celebration of the marriage. Her parents are
also bound to get Rs. 40 or two bullocks. If the widow marries a
member of her late husband's family, his representative is entitled to
Rs. 80 or. 100 by way of compensation. If this is not paid the repre-
sentative can claim the amount paid on the marriage of any female
child born of the second union, and in default of such a child beios
born the husband of the woman is bound to procuro & wife for him or
his hair as the case may be. The parents of the woman in this case are
not entitled to anything.
* They differ from other Afgháns in this rospoct, that the brido's father gives a dowry
instead of receiving a bride-prico.



418
Shiranni custo mo.
Funeral ceremonies. These are the same as aro in vogue amongst
Muhammadans generally, with a few unimportant exceptions :
(1) The Shirannis do not entertain persons who come to condole
with them on the death of a relation.
(2) Water is not sprinkled on tombs of the departed during the
Muharram.
(3) No alms aro given to the poor on the 7th or 40th day after
death in the case of a woman or a child.
· (4) A post with a top rudely-carved to represent & torban is placed
at the head of the tomb of a male (a general custom in Turkey), while
over the tombs of a celebrated mulláh, a martyr or a chief, a T-shaped
pole with pendant tassels is set.
Inheritance. On the death of the father his sons are considered his
legal heirs and divide his property equally amongst them. The eldest,
however, is usually given a slightly larger share. In default of male
issue, the brother, or nephew, or any direct descendant in the male line
succeeds. In case of failure of any such direct heir, all the male
members of the brancb to which the deceased belonged divide the
property equally between them. The fomales of the family are not
entitled to anything.
Right of refuge.--An offender who is unable to protect "himself from
his enemy or, in other words, when his own territory is too hot' to hold
him, generally takes refuge with a chief or other powerful personage
belonging to some other section or tribe. The custom (nahora it is
called) is to take a sheep and slaughter it at the door of the person's
house whose protection is claimed, and who is bound to give bim refuge.
The offender then becomes the protector's hamsáya or neighbour, and
is bound to make good to the latter any loss incurred by him in
consequence of the responsibility be has undertaken. In the event of
the hamsáya's death the protector's claim forms the first charge on the
deceased's property. Another method of claiming protection consists
in the offender's tying the end of his chádar to that of the wife of some
powerful pursopage, when the latter generally affords him the succour
he requires, though he is not bound to do so as in the former case.
The custom of nahora is also employed when one man begs' any great
favour of another. The slaughtering of a sheep at a person's door
marks the urgency of the case, and is something like the Hindu custom
of sitting dharna.
Dress..The dress of the Shiránnís differs but little from that of
other hill tribes. The dress of a common Shiránni consists of a coarse
black blanket tied round the waist, and another thrown over his shoul-
ders ; saudals, whose soles are made of bullock's hide, rudely tapned
with ashes of the tamarisk tree, and a few yards of white cotton cloth
loosely twisted round the head. Women of the lower classes generally
wear only a shift and a sári made of khaddar cloth, which is imported
from the Dámán. Well -to-do women of course make a more elaborate
toilet, wearing paijamas, a bodice and a sári. The burka or veil is not
used at all. The women in most of the Shiránni villagos are: kept well
out of sight, but in the Hassan Khel country they seem much more
civilized and were at all times in evidence. They seem better dressed
favouras em of nahora ho is not bound onerally afore the wife of soins



Shiranni law.
418
too, and wore more jewellery than their less favoured sisters in other
parts of the country. The men generally wear a chádar, a loose
shirt, baggy paijámas and a turban, thoagh the poorest are content
with a coarse blanket round the waist and another thrown over the
shoulders. The men's clothes are usually white, wbile the women
affect dark blue or sometimes red. Unmarried girls, however, dress
in white.
Ornaments.--Siiver ornaments only are worn by the women, the
following being the most important :-Armlets, ear-rings (consisting of
& number of little ring's inserted round the ear), a neoklet, a chain with
ghungris for the forehead, and a waistbelt of rupees. In the case of an
unmarried girl a ropee is added to the silver chain, but this is removed
on her marriage.
Food. The principal article of food is maize broad baked on 8-stone,
though bread made of wheat, barley; and jowár is also sometimes eaten.
Phis is eaten with buttermilk in the morning, but-plain in the evening.
Meat is rarely eaten, and only on oocasions of rejoicings or when
guests are entertained. Dál is not an article of food.
Intoxicating drugs and tobacco.-Tobacco is universally eaten. The
dry leaf is rubbed in the hand and the powder then smeared on the
teeth and gums. This custom prevails to a certain extent even
amongst women. The use of intoxicatiаg drugs is not common, though
Mr. White King met several who indulged in this vice. A few have
evon taken to liquor.
Amusements.-_Dancing is practised. It differs from that of the
Khattaks and is more like that of the dancing Darweshes at Con-
stantinople than anything else.
Criminal and Civil Justice.-Crime is rare in the tribe. Adultery is
not common. If a man is found in flagrante delicto by the husband,
the latter kills both his wife and her paramour on the spot. In case
there is strong ground for suspicion the woman is generally killed and
the right foot or pose of her supposed paramour cut off, and one meets
a number of footless Shirannís. The operation is performed in a most
brutal manner generally with a knife, and the bleeding stump is
then plunged into boiling oil to stanch the blood. For house trespass
with theft a fine of Rs. 100 is generally inflicted, a restoration of the
stolen property or its value being also insisted on..
In serious cases, if one party desires to come to terms, some infidential
mnen of the village or section are invited to use their good offices with
8 view to a settlement. The ceremony of nahora is then gone through.
and should no objection be raised, a jirga is assembled and the mate
ter settled. Amongst the Sultánzais and Hassan Khels there is even
an appellate co art, and if the jirga disagree or either side is dissatisfied
with the award, recourse is had to the principal Malik of the Sultán-
Zais, who owes his appointment as a judge of appeal chiefly to his
character for integrity. Among the Hassan Khels the office is here-
ditary.
Another carious fact worth mentioning in this connection is that
interest is charged at the rate of Re. 1 per cout -per mensem on all cash



Shiranni shrines.
transactions. · Where grain is the medium of exchange interest is paid
at the rate of Re. 1-4 per harvest. Mortgages are contracted verbally,
no record of the transaction being made. Land is the only article
mortgaged. In some cases it is only hypothecated as security for a
deot, but, as a general rule, possession is retained until the debt is
paid off.
The blood-feud. The quarrel is strictly limited to the actual offender.
The blood-money is Rs. 700 for males and Rs. 350 for females. Another
curious custom, apparently peculiar to the Largha Shiránnís, is that should
vengeance be exacted in hot blood, i. e. immediately after the offence,
no blood-money is claimable but if some time is allowed to elapse before
the offended party takes his revenge, then compensation is payable to
the relations of the murdered man at half rates.
· Dwelling houses.--The people generally live in stone-built houses
with flat mud roofs, each hut containing a single room about 8 feet
high and 10 feet square, which is occupied by the whole family. Doors
are considered a superfluous luxury, the doorway generally being
closed witb & bush. The stock of furniture is very limited, consisting
as it does of a mat or two and a couple of cots made of olive wood
and woven with a sort of grass called burwáz.
Monials.-No barbers or shoemakers are found in the country. Men
shave one another when nécossary and they make their own sandals.
A few carpenters and blacksmiths live in the larger villages. These
are said to be the descendants of men who came from the Dámán and
settled here. Potters do not exist. The women make their own vessels,
though they are not able to manufacture oups (piálas) and large broad
vessels like patris which are imported from the Dámán. There are
no weavers in Largha. In Bargha, it was believed, there are a dozon
families of this class, who foru a village community of their own.
They make blankets, tagras (a sort of carpet) and sacks. In the cold
season they visit the Largha country and carry on their manufacture
there. Cbamárs and sweepers are unknown in Largha.
Shrines. The following are some of the principal shrines in
Largha :-
1. Takht-i-Suleiman in the Takbt Range.
2. Khwája Pír at Pír Ghundi near Zor Sbahr.*
3. Tarin Pír at Parwára.
4. Abbi Nikkat and Mián Adam at Khaisara.
Others, such as Naurang Nikka near Lundai Azim, Khan Mubam-
med Akhundzáda at Darazand, Jalal-ud-din near Baspa, Bulait Nikka
near Dág, Haitan Nikka at Lundi Sultánzai are of less note.
* Near Zor Shahr I observed a baobab tree to which a curious logand is attached. A
faqir is said to have in some way or other offended the holy man in charge of the above-
mentioned shrine who changed him into a treo, in corroboration of which my informant
pointed to the red juice that exuded from it when scraped with a stone. The presence of
this tree, which is not indigenous, would seem to indicato a Mughal encampment in the
vicinity at some not very remote period, as in Central India I have often observed baobab
troos in places whore Jahangir is kaowo to bavo anaumpod. --(L. W. K.)
Nikka means 'chiat' or lord.



The Shiranni character.
415
The Grst is the celebrated throne of Star-taught Solomon." It is
very difficult of access, and but few visit it. There is no tomb there
and of course it has no mujáwar. Sick people are sometimes taken up
to it and prayers offered for their recovery to the saint. Children, too,
are oocasionally buried in the ground below it. The shrine is visited
both by Hindús and Muhammadans, and is held in high veneration by
all classes and creeds in the surrounding country.
Next in importance comes Khwája Pír, which, as well as Nos. 3
and 4, is a Sayyid shrine. It is much resorted to by Shiránnís,
especially those of the Uba and Hassan Khel sections, and an hereditary
mujáwar lives there, who is supported by the offerings of the faithfui.
Annual festivals are held both here and at the Takbt, when offerings
are made and cattle sacrificed. Sacrifice is always made at one of these
shrines on special occasions, as, for instance, when the Hassan and
Oba Khels entered into a compact to oppose us should we enter their
country. The Parwara shrine is chiefly resorted to by members of
the Chuhar Khel section. Khaisara was founded by Abbi Nikka and
his brother Mián Adam Bukhari, Sayids, who settled here some 80
years ago. Their desceudants are held in great respect by all Shirán-
nís, and their valley is of the most flourishing in Largha, but the
shrines of the Sayad brothers are of, perbaps, too recent date to be
much venerated.
Weights and measures. - Weights are not used, only measures, which
are
4 lapas (a palm full) ... = 1 adháni.
2 adhánis ... ... = 1 kurwa.
2 kurwu8 .. ... =1 nimczha.
2 nimozhas ... ... =l anda or sack.
Diseases.-Cholera is almost unknown, as is syphilis, The Shiránnis
dread small.pox, which is rare. A patient is removed from the village
and kept there till he dies or recovers under the care of one who has
had the disease. Recovery happens seldom, but when it does occur
the patient's clothes are fumigated with the smoke of ak or khagal
leaves. Fever, common at certain seasons, is treated with the ex-
pressed juice of akri leaves, and in bad cases with the ordinary sheep-
skin cure.
Character and appearance.—The Shirápnís are perbaps the most
uncivilized tribe on the Dera Ismail Khan border, and have all the
characteristics of wild races. They are not given to thieving, but lying
is a vice which intercourse with our district has taught them, as
amongst the Sultánzais and Khiddarzais who inhabit the slopes of the
Takht and are far removed from our civilizing influence, a Shiránni's
word can generally be relied on. Physioally, the Shiránnís are of
middling stature, thin, but hardy and active, with bold features,
high cheek-bones and their general appearance is wild and manly,
according to some observers.
Marder or killing for the mere lust of blood is very rare. They are
not so cheerful and joyous as their neighbours, the Mahsúds, and seem
to take the world much more seriously. Fanaticism cannot be assigned
to them as a fault, and their performance of the rigbts of religion
struck Mr. White King being very perfunctory. They are lazy in the



Shirámi-Shún-dal.
extreme and thriftless. In appearance they are ill-favoured, low-sized
and wiry with high cheek-bones. They are by no means & manly race,
though an exception in this respect might perhaps be made in favour of
the Khiddarzais, some of whom are fine-looking men. Each tribe has got
its nikka, or nominal chief, who is entitled to tithes at the rate of four -
or five seers per family per harvest. Fatteb Khán of Darzand is the
only Malik who, as far as could be ascertained, regularly levies this,
though other chiefs also claim it. The Khiddarzai chiefs also receive
" aids” in grain, cattle and cash from his fellow-tribesmen, but whether
by way of alms or tithes is not certain.
Place-names. These are mostly descriptive, but some apparently old
names survive, e. g. Shiva Narai, 3 miles from Domandi village, a grove
of shisham trees in an uncultivated kachi: Vehowa (cf. Pehowa in
Karnál), Vyasta: Chaudwan: Ambár, close to which is the Tor Dabar, a
huge black boulder at which tribal jirgas are usually held.*
Personal names.-Spin Kund, Rehat, Sheran, Sainka, Sadagol,
Ranagul, Tor and many others have a curious look.
Sdírází, a Sayad clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SHIFQOTRA, a division, probably sectarian, of the Jágs.
SHORÁGAR, a saltpetre maker. Called rehgar (? regar) in and about Hissár.
SaoTo, a caste found only. in Nagar. It works in leather, like the Doms,
but ranks below them and gives daughters to them without return :
Biddulph's Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh, p. 39.
SAUDAKEI, see under Batikhel..
SAÚN.DAL, the most powerful tribe in the Punjab, according to Prinsept
in the time of Vikramajít. They would not intermarry with the
aborigines who were looked upon as an inferior race of Ghator, Ghaut
or Gat, or as they are now called Játs. Prinsep also says:
“Sometime after the invasion of Alexander against Porus, it is said that large volunteer
armies flocked into the province from remote parts of Hindoostán. Among them arrived
" Shoon," “ Hoon," and “ Dall," the three reputed sons of the great Raja Rachore
Rao of Rájpatána, whose capitals were Oojeia and Indore. The emigrants fraternised
with the early settlers, and introduced then the art of agriculture and the use of wella
for irrigation. It is even computed that out of 500,000 warriors some 850.000 devoted
themselves so diligently to the cultivation of land, that in 250 years after their arrival the
whole country from Lahore to Mooltán and Kussoor to Sjálkote was. cleared of jungle,
and to this day the tract is known in the Bar jangles called the Sandal Bar.!
Hundal is a Ját tribe, bat no such tribe as Shundal appears to be
known in Sialkot. The Hundal is not a very important tribe. A
Hundal tarf or ward is found in a good many villages not now owned,
apparently, by Hundal Játs.
* Several village names occur very frequently in these hills, notably Nishpa, Landai,
Baspa, Ragasur, Karam and Murgha. They all refer to some peculiar characteristics, for
instance
Nishpa.--A mountain hollow where rain water collects and cannot run out.
Landai.-Oultivable ground lying between two hill torrents.
Baspa.--A mountain spur which is occupied as residence in the summer
Ragasur. -A large extent of bare stony ground on a height generally overlooking a stream.
Murgha.--A cliff over a hill stream.
Karam. A small ragasur aboat 13 gbumaos in extent.
. † Sialkote Settlement Report, 1865, § 136.
Ibid. § 135. In modern Panjabi dal means an army, multitude or swarm, and it may
form part of such tribal names as Hundal and Gondal.



Shuni-Siál.
417
SĦONI, see, under Hatikhel.
SAYÚNA, lit. à goblin, a sept of second grade Kanets found in Asrang, a
village of Shawá pargana in Kanaur.
SIÁL, Ryál, politically one of the most important tribes of the Western
Plains. “As Mr. E. B. Steedman observed the modern history of the
Jhang district is the history of the Siál.* They are a tribe of Punwar
Rájputs who rose to prominence in the Srst half of the 18th century.t
Mr. Steedman wrote:
"They were till then probably a pastoral tribe, but little given to husbandry, dwelling on
the banks of the river, and grazing their cattle during the end of the cold and the first
months of the hot weather in the low lands of the Chonáb, and during the rainy season in
the uplands of the Jhang bár. The greater portion of the tract now occupied by them was
probably acquired during the stormy century that preceded the conquest of Hindustán by the
Mughals. During this period the country was dominated from Bhera, and sometimes from
Multan. The collection of revenue from a nomad population inhabiting the fastnesses of
the bar and the deserts of the thal could never have been easy, and was probably seldom
attempted. Loft alone, the Sials applied themselves successfully to dispossessing those that
dwelt in the land--the Nols, Bhangus, Mangans, Marrals, and other old tribes—amusing
themselves at the same time with a good deal of internal strife and quarrelling, and now and
then with stiffer fighting with the Kharrals and Baloch."
“Then for 200 years there was peace in the land, and the Sials remained quiet subjects
of the Labore Súbah, the seats of local governnient being Chiniot and Shorkot. Walidad
Khán died in 1747, one year before Ahmad Shih Abdáli made his first inroad and was
defeated before Dehli. It is not well known when he succeeded to the chieftainship, but
it was probably early in the century; for a considerable time must have been taken up in
the roduction of minor chiefs and the introduction of all the improvements with which
Walidád is credited. It was during. Walidad's time that the power of the Siáls reached its
zenith. The country subject to Walídád extended from Mankhera in the Thal eastwards to
Kamália on the Rávi, from the confluence of the 'Rávi and Chenab to the ilaqa of Pindi
Bhattián beyond Chiniot. He was succeeded by his nephew (náyatulla, who was little if at
all inferior to his uncle in administrative and military ability. He was engaged in constant
warfare with the Bbangi Sikhs on the north and the chiefs of Multán to the south. His Doar
relations, the Siál chiefs of Rashidour, gave him constani trouble and annoyance. Once
indeed a party of forty troopers raide ! Jhang, and carried off the Khin prisoner. He was
a captive for six months. The history of the three succeeding chieftains is that of the
growth of the power of the Bhangis and of their formidable rival the Sukarcharia mis!
destined to be soon, the subjugator of both Bhangis and Siáls. Chiniot was taken in 1803,
Jhang in 1808. Ahmad Khán, the last of the Siál Kháns, regained his couatry shortly after
in 1808, but in 1810, he was again captured by the Mahárája, who took him to Lahore and
threw him into prison. Thus ended whatever independence the sigl Khans of Jhang had over
enjoyed."
.“ The Siáls are descended from Rai Shaukar, a Punwár Rajput, a resident of Dáranagar
between Alla bábád and Fattahpur. A branch of the Punwárs bad previously emigrated from
their native country to Jaunpur, and it was tbere that Rai Shankar was born." One story
has it that Rai Shankar had three sons, Seo, Teo, and Gheo, from whom have descended
the Siále of Jhang, the Tiwánas of Shahpur and the Obebas of Pindi Gheb. Another
tradition states that Siál was the only son of Rai Shankar, and that the ancestors of the
Tiwanag and Ghebas, as Chantália and Gheba were only collateral relations of Shankar
and Siál. On the death of Rai Shankar we are told that great dissensions arose among the
- members of the family, and his son Siál émigrated during the reign of Allauddin Ghori to
the Punjab. It was about this time that many Rájput families emigrated from the provinces
of industán to the Panjab, including the ancestors of the Kharrals, Tiwánas, Ghebas,
Chaddbars, and Panwár Siáls. It was the fashion in those days to be converted to the
Muhammadan religion by the eloquent exhortations of the sainted Bawa Farid of Pák
Pattan, and accordingly we find that Sial in his wanderings came to Pák Pattan and there :
*A mirási attached to the Dhíduána clan says, that Sewa, a Sahgal Khatri, was converted
to Isiám by Báwa Farid and was then called Siál. He was a resident in Siálkot. This is
rather a curious legend seeinz that the ancient Ságala is identified with the modern Siálkoţ.
Sir Alex, Cunningham said that the Sikls were supposed to be descended from
Rája Húdi, the Indo-Soythian opponent of the Bhatti Rája Rasálu of Şiálkot; but thiş
tradition is not mentioned elsewhere,



418
Siál history.
reponnced the religion of his ancestors. The saint blessed him, and prophesied that his
non's seed should reign over the tract between the Jhelum and Chenab rivers. This
prediccion was not very accurate. Báwa Farid died about 1284.65. Siál and his
followers appear to have wandered to and fro in the Rechna and Jetch dobbs for some
time before they settled down with some degree of permanency on the right bank of the
Jhelum. It waż during this unsettled period that Biál married one of the women of the
country, Sobág, daughter of Bhai Bhan Mekan, of 86biwal in the Shahpur distriot, and
is algu said to have built a fort at Sialkot while a temporary resident there. At their
first settloment in this distriot, the Bible occupied the tract of country lying between
Mapkbera in the thal and the river Jhelum, east aod west, and from Khushåb on the north
to what is now the Garh Mahárája ildqa on the south."
The head.quarters of the Siáls are tbe whole southern portion of the Jhang district,
along the left bank of the Chenab to ithe junction with the Ravi, and the riverain of the
right bank of the Chenab between the confluences of the Jhelum and Bári. They also
hoid both banks of the Ravi throughout its course in the Multán and for some little
distance in the Montgomery district, and are found in small numbers on the upper portion
of the river. They have spread up the Jhelum into 8báhpur and Gájrát, and are found in
considerable numbers in the lower Indus of the Deraját and Mazaffargarh. Mr. Purser
described the Bidl as “large id stature and of a rough disposition, fond of cattle and
caring little for agrioultare. They observe Hindu ceremonies like the Kbarral and Kathia
and do not keep their women in pardah. They object to olothes of a brown (üda) colour*
and to the use of brass vessels.". There is a siál tribe of Ghiraths in Kangra.
The Tarikh-e-Jhang-Syált gives the history of the Siáls from their
first occupation of the country dear the confluence of the Chenab and
Jhelam. "Its list of chiefs begins with Mál Khán, and it puts the
establishment of their rule in Jhang in 1477 A. D.+ Bir, the heroine
of one of the best known Punjab legends, was a Siál maiden who fell
in love with Dhidho, a Ranjha Ját. Her tomb is about half a mile
from Jhang and dates from about the middle of the 16th century.
It is hypothral being open to the sky. It is the scene of an annual
fair.
: The Sial clans include the Mähni, now nearly extinct, the Jalal-
khápána or descendants of Jalál Khan and their ruling clan, the
Chela and many others for which see the Appendix. But Monckton
recorded that the royal clan was called Khanna-Chadhar, '& caste of
Muhammadans converted from Hinduism. The Khanna is a Khatri
section and Dinga, another olan found in Jhang, recalls the Dhingra
Arusas.
The Mahni clan is descended from Kbiwa, and its uoad, Nusrat
Khán, was driven out of Jhang by Ranjit Singh. He found an asylam
among the Kathias in Shorkot, bat was eventually murdered ; and the
clan is now only represented by a few families in Multán. One tradi.
tion attributes the decay of the Mahni clan to the curse of a faqir who
had one fair daughter. She being of somewhat weak itellect, wander-
ed about the country in a state of nudity. In her wanderings she
strayed into Kbíwa, wbenoe the Mahni chief drove her out with con.
tumely, thinking no doubt that she was no better than she ought to be.
This was resented by her father, who cursed the clan in the following
words, addressing himself to the sacred tree near his abode :-
Chautália gharmdka.
Ithon Shichi Mahnd kad:
Kahr Allah dá mária,
Na rahene vad.
The Siál are also said to avoid the use of the kalak, a long water melon.
.P. N Q. II, § 1115, but af. III, $788.
Temple Legends of the Punjab, II, p. 177,



Siál. clans.
419
ubber by menials reaping, booking wido
Another tribal heroine of the Mábni Siáls was the famous Sahibán
who was betrothed to a Chadhar youth, but eloped with her cousin
Mirza. The Chadhars and Mábnis, however, pursued and overtook
them, killing the guilty pair. But these two tribes were in turn
attacked by the Kharſals who recovered the bodies and buried thein at
Dánápur in Multán (or Dánábad in Montgomery), a place said to have
been within the limits of old Khíwál (possibly the tracu round Khíwa).
The resulting feud lasted so long that it came to be considered unlucky
to possess daughters, and so girl children were strangled, in memory
of the manner of Sáhibán's death. The Siáls resent any allusion to
Sáhibán or Hír.*
The Jalálkhánána regard themselves aus descendants of Rajá Karn,
and as such have special customs, avoiding widow remarriage, all
agricultural work except reaping, beef, hare and camel's flesh,
food cooked by menials, and water from a vessel which has not
been scrubbed-in fact they are almost as strict in these matters as
high-caste Hindus. Some of the clans still employ Brahmans and
Mirásis for certain observances, but the custom is dying out.
The Chelas were originally cattle-graziers, and avoid eating the
khagga fish, because it bears the name of their pír. They take wives
from any Siált clan or from Pathans, but do not give daughters outside
their own clan. In Jhang the KHAGGAS are also returned as a Siál sept.
The following are the Siál clans found in Multán: Arána, Bada,
Bharwana, Bothána, Budhwana, Chachkána, Charána, Daudhána,
Danhána, Dawána, Dhalana, Daultána, Fatyána, Gagrána, Hamyána,
Hiraj, Kamlána, Kankar, Karnána, Karnwána, Khara, Korába,
Ladhána, Latwána, Malkána, Mirali, Nahrána, Nakyána, Nargána,
Nohána, Niyána, Panjwána, Perwána, Rájbána, Rájhwána, Sadrána,
Sadyána, Sarána, Sargána, Saspal, Sayána, Shekhána, Sigána, Tharáj,
Tarad.
The other Siáls all contract widow remarriage, usually with a
brother of the husband, and tan-bakhshi on the part of widows of low
caste with Siáls is recognised.
The clans are not all of equal rank, e.g. the Jabbuánas take wives
from the Rajbánas when they cannot find one among the paternal
grandfather's descendants and the Khánuánas take wives from the
Chadbrar Játs. The Miráli Siáls in Multán also take wives, with good
dowers in land, from the Játs, and in Jhang the Bharwana used to
be given to female infanticide, taking wives from the Siprá Játs who
curiously are found associated with them in almost all their villages.
In Bahawalpur the Siáls are found both in the Lamma and in the
Ubha, but more especially in the former part, the Maghiána, Kamyána,
Hasnána, Shaikhána (descendants of Shaikh Ali Bharmi) and
* Temple, Legends, III, p. 1, P. N. Q. III, § 124,
* In Panjabi Siál is described as the name of a part of country in the Punjab and well that
of a Ját tribe (Panjabi Dicty., p. 1049). Siál also means (1) the cold season, and (2) a
jackal, which animal is said a siál singhi or horin which renders one invulnerable : for this
belief cf. N. I. N.Q., V, § 49. West of the Indus it has three meanings according to Sir
Jamos Douie : '(1) a stranger, a Baloch of a different tribe. (The word is never I believe
applied to a Ját): (2) a gliost; (3) an enemy: see note at p. 53 of Trans. of Bilochi-náma
by Hetu Rám



420
Siámi. Siar.
Kirtwána septs being strongly represented in the Allahá bád peshkári.
The Sial tradition in this State is that Sewa, son of Sangar, Rája of
Pánipat and Karnal, was expelled from his country by his brothers
Ten and Gheu, and took refuge with Bába Farid-ud-Din Shakar-Ganj,
who converted him to Islám in the 7th century of the Hijra, and
instructed him to settle in Jhang where he married a Mekan* girl.
From his three sons are descended a number of septs : -
i. From Máhni : (i) Muklána, ſië) Sajrána, (iii) Pandgána, (iv) Lakh.
nána, and (v) Panjwána. . -
ii. From Bharmi: (i) Sargána, (ii) Kamlána, (iii) Chela, (ivj Alyána,
(v) Hiráj, (vi) Thiraj, (vii) Kamyána.
izi. From Koli: (i) Salyána, (ii) Rajyána, (iii) Borána, (iv) Daráj,
(0) Sabána, () Khichyána, (vii) Ambrána, (viii) Umrána, (ix) Metkána,
(c) Chuchkána (descendants of Chúchak the father of Hir, Ranjha's
mistress), (xi) Mughyána, and (vii) Jalál-Khanána.
Siśmí, the name of a class of faqirs called Bairagis. ---Panjábi Dicty., p. 1049;
cf. Shámi.
SIÁN, & tribe of Játs found in Sialkot and claiming to be descended from
Sián, a Rájput of Lunar race who ruled in Sirhind. His descendants
Ves and Ganes migrated to Siálkot in the time of Aurangzeb.
SIAR, a tribe of Játs who are said to have come from Sindh. . They
founded a colony on the Indus near Karor Lal Isá. The Siárs are
now among the most industrious of the agricultural population but,
until the colonization of the Doáb was taken up in earnest, by men
of greater resource and industry, they appear to have been only a wild
tribe of cattle owners, occupying a very limited areait
According to another account the Siár dwelt west of the lúdás but
once a party of their women made a pilgrimage to Liál Isá and on their
way home were compelled by Mírú, the Sámita, to unveil themselves.'
A terce feud arose in consequence between the two tribos, bát finally
the lands of Muranwala village were divided between them. The
hamlet itself however remained a bone of contention until Faqirú the
Sayyid took it into his own possession. The Siár marriage customs
reseinble those of the Hindus, although the nikáh is read as in the
Muhammadan rites, and the tribe does not recognise tbe Bráhman's
authority. It is endogamous.
In Baluchistán the Siárs are said to be the original inhabitants of
Lás. They appear to be a very mixed race, chiefly composed of Bráhúis,
* A Bhatti sept.
+ Writing in 1865 Capt. Hector Mackenzie said that the improvement of this traot seems
to have been first determined on about 330 years ago. First oame a tribe of Qarajsh. It
is related that two brothers, descendants of Hazrat Baháwal Hagg (whose tomb is
ap object of great. veneration at Multán), býving a quarrel, wont to Delhi to have it
settled at the imperial court. The emperor referred them to their murshid, one Hazrat
Daúd. The murshid saw that the wisest mode of settling the dispute was to separate
the brothers. One of them, Makhdúm Lál 18, he advised to return to the waste country
in the Sindh Ságar Doab. He came, and brought with him a number of emigrants of
tho Lohách, Sumrah and Gat (sic) clans, of the Ját tribe. On their arrival, attracted pro.
bably by the presence of the Siárs, they settled down in their vicinity, and ultimately
indooing the tribe to move down nearer the river, built themselves the village of Karor.
Lál Isa's tomb is hero a massive building. A largely attended fair is hold annually in
honour of the saint. This, howover, was but a small colony.



Bibájá-Sidhu
421
that being the language in common use among them, while Jagd áli is
spoken by the rest of the Las Bela tribes. Their women also wear
the Bráhúi woman's long ghagra or gown.*
Sibáiá, an offshoot of the Katoch, the great Rájput clan of Kángra.
It derives its naine from Siba (Dáda-Siba) or Sivia in the Dera tahsil,
or, possibly, from Rájá Saparan Cband who became a Rájá from
generations after Rájá Hari Cband had founded Haripur. Saparan
Chand founded Siba, which may be named after him.
SIBIÁ, a Ját tribe found in Ferozepur. A pregrant wornan married in this
tribe died, but when placed on the funeral pyre, she gave birth to a son
who was called Sibia, from siba, a burning ghat. Their bakhuhán or
place of ancestors at Rámgarh Sibian, is worshipped on the naurátras.
SIDDE, fom. •Ní, a saint. ---Panjabi Dicty., p. 1050.
SIDHOWANA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Sippo, SIDRU-BARÁR.-The Sidhu, with its branch the Barár, or Sidhu-Barár,
is the largest and most important of the Ját tribes of the Punjab, for from
it have görung the great Phúlkián families of Patiala, Nábha and Jind
and the Barar family of faridkot. The Sidhu trace their origio to
Jaisal, a Bhatti Rajput and founder of Jaisalmer, who was driven
from his kingdom by a successful rebellion and took refuge with
Prithi Ráj, Chaghán, the last Hindu king of Delhi. His descendants
overran Hissar and Sirsa and gave to the latter tract the name of
Bhattiána. Among them was Khiwa, who niarried a Ját woman of
the Ghaggar, and had bg her Sidhu the ancestor of the tribe. Sidhu
had four sons, Devi, Búr, Sur, and Rúpach, and from Dhul the descen.
dant of Búr is sprung the Barár tribe.t The pure Bhatti Rajputs of
Bhattiána still admit their relationship with the Sidhu and Barár. The
early history of the tribe is told in full detail at pages 1 to 10 and 546
to 548 of Griffin's Punjab Rájhs; indeed the whole book is a political
history of the descendants of Sidhu; while the leading minor families
are noticed at pages 429 to 436 of his Punjab Chiefs. Some further de-
tails of their early ancestry will be found at page 8 of the Hissár
Settlement Report. The original home of the tribe was the Málwa, and
it is still there that they are found in largest numbers. But they have
also spread across the Sutlej into Lahore, Amritsar, Jalluridur, and other
Districts. Mr. Brandreth tbus described the Barár of Ferozepur :-
.The Barárs are said to have been Bhatti Rájpats of the same family as the Rájputs
of Jaisalmer, where their original hore was. The name of their ancestor was Sidbu,
* Baluchistán Census Report, 1902, p. 112. May we conjecture that the Siár came up
with their Baloch or Kalhora overlords, just as the Quraish brought in the Lohanch, etc. ?
The Siár displaced the Bahlím, now extinot, an nld half-mythical race of gigantic men
whose mighty bones and great earthen vessels are still said to be found in the Thal..
4 The division is also said to be into Jaid. bans and Baſáf-bans. Jaid and Baráļ lived
in Jaisalmer, and fought against its ruler. Eventually they conquered it, but they
tben proceeded to start a feud with each other, and so came to Bhadaur which they
divided, Jaid's descendants now progressed in civilisation : Baráf's did not. At wed.
dings, when the jand tree is out, a Mochi's (cobbler's) implements are worshipped to
commemorate the escape of the only surviving child of the tribe in a massacre by the
Raja of Jaisalmer. When this child's mother Lachhmi, widow of Rai Ar, bad given birth
to him. be was concealed in a cobbler's bag by the mirási of the tribe. Or, to quote
anotber account, Sidhu is said to have been suokled by à Wangar Moohi yoman, who
when ho grew up, begged him to respect the ár and rambi of tha shoe askors. Sidhu bado



422
A Sidhre pedigree.
whose grandson was named Barár, whence they are called indiferently both Sidhu and
Barár. Either Barár ur some descendant of his migrated to Bhatinda, whence his
offspring spread over the neighbouring lands, and are now in possession of a very large
traot of country. They occupy almost the whole of iláqas Mari, Mudki, Mokatsar,
Bouchon, Mehráj, Sultán Kbán, aod Bhudaur in this district, the whole of Faridkot, a
great part of Patiala, Nábba, Jhumbha and Malaadh. The chiefs of all these states belong
to tbe same family. The Bbattis of Sirsa who embraced Muhammadanism were also
originally Bhatti Rajputs, and related to the Barárs, but their descent is treated to somo
common anvestor before the time of Sidhu.
“ The Barárs are not equal to the other tribes of Játs as cultivators. They wear fiper
clothes, and oopsider themselves a more illustrious race. Many of them were desperato
dacoits in former years, and all the most notorious criminals of this description that
have been apprehended and brought to justice under our rule were Başárs. Female
infanticide is said to have been practised among them to a great extent in former times.
I am told that a few years ago there was scarcely a young girl to be found in any of the
Barár villages. This crime is said to have originated in a deceit that was once practised
upon one of the chiefs of Nábla by which his daughter was betrothed to a man of an
inferior tribe, and thoagh be considered himself boond to complete the marriage sub.
sequently entered into an agreement with all his tribe to put to death all the daughters
that should be born to them hereafter, in order to prevent the possibility of such a
disgrace occarring again. .
“ From all accounts, hon ever, this horrid practice has been almost entirely discontinuod
of late years, and I can detect no difference now between the proportionate number of
female obildren in the Barár villages and in villages inhabited by other castes."
The following is one of the podigrees given by the Sidhus, in
Amritsar :
Sri Kisban.
Parduman.
Alazwadh.
Chbarchhad.
Taonu.
Salwaban.
Bhasol.
Dusar.
Munger,
Man.
Kaseru.
Jawanda.
Barați.
Mangli.
Rai Ar.
Sidbu.
his descendants make every bride and bridegruom do obeisance to these tools at their
wedding, but the usage is dying out. Owing to it, however, the Wangaf got of the Mochis
tyles itself Sidhu,



SidqimSindhu.
423
Sidh Tiſkára is the sidh of the Sidhu Játs, and the first milk of a
cow is offered to him on the 14th badi of every month, on which day they
Algo feed unmarried girls. He is also regarded as their jathera and his
samadh is at Mahraj in Ferozepur. At wedding they distribute rots
(loaves weighing 14 maunds) among the brotherhood. Sirdars Karm
Singh and Dbarm Singh were the first Sidhus to turn Sikh.Amb.
8. Ř., Wynyard, 83-5. See also under Lakhiwal.
SIDQI, a term derived from a root meaning true,' as is Sadiqi, a name with
which it is often confused. Sidqi is, in the east of the Punjab at any
rate, often used as an equivalent to nau-Muslim, to distinguish converts
of Indian descent from original Muhammadan immigrants.
Sige, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
SIGWÁL,'an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur.
SIAJDHÁRI, see Sajhdhári.
SIKH, dim. SIKARA.- Panjabi Dicty., p. 1053. Cf. Singh, and the account of
Sikhism in Vol. I.
.
.
SIND80.–The Sindhu is, so far as our figures go, the second largest
Ját tribe, being surpassed in numbers by the Sidbu only. Their head.
quarters are the Amritsar and Lahore districts, but they are found all
along the upper Sutlej, and under the hills from Ambala in the east to
Sialkot and Gojranwala in the west. They claim descent from the
Raghobansi branch of the Solar Rájputs through Rám Chandar of
Ajud bia. They say that their ancestors were taken by or accompanied
Mahmúd to Ghazni, and returned during the thirteenth century or in
the reign of Firoz Shah from Afghánistán to India. Shortly afterwards
they settled in the Mánjha near Lahore, Some of the Sindhu say that
it was Ghazni in the Deccan, and not in Afghánistán, from which they
came; while others have it that it was Ghadni in Bíkáner. The Jul.
lundur Sindhu say that they came from the south to the Manjha somo
two or three centuries ago, when the Pathans dispossessed the Mani
Rajputs, and shortly afterwards moved from Amritsar to Jullundur at
the invitation of the Gils to take the place of the ejected Manj. Sir
Lepel Griffin was of opinion that the real origin of the tribe was from
north-western Rájpatána. The political history of the tribe, which was
of capital importance under the Sikhs, is given in great detail at pages
229 7, 360 ff, and 417 to 428 of the same writer's Punjab Chiefs. The
Sindhu have the same peculiar marriage customs already described as
practised by the Sahi Játs. Those in Ludbiána are however said not
to observe the chhattra rite at weddings, but wben they visit their
jathera on such an occasion the bride strikes her husband 7 times with
a light switch on the shoulders, and he retaliates but more smartly,
In Sialkot the Mubammadan villagós are said to follow the pagvand
rulo of inberitance while the Hindu ones allow chundavand. The -
Sindhu of Karnal worship Kála Mahar or Kala Pír, their ancestor,
whose chief shrine is said to be at Thána Satra in Sialkot, their alleged
place of origin,



24
Sindhu septs.
Talocha.
sháb.*
Pabá,
Kan.
- The Sindhus have 84 muhins or septs whose origin is thus described :
Kam Chandar.
Wágar whoso pedigres is given
Lahu.
in the margio had a son, Siodhu,
Ghaj.
married to a wife named Nan.
dan. Sindhu died, and Nandan,
Hariam,
ignorant that she was pregnant
made Wágar marry a girl of her
own family. But the latter died
Súrátía.
in child-bed and her son Chí
Kenidi.*
was born on the funeral pyre,
Meanwhile Kan had been
born to Nandan, but Wágar
sad.
despairing of Chí's life begged
Wagar.
all his neighbours to give him
a child if they had one, lest he
Sindhu.
Chí.
should die without à son ;
and so on his return from the
Mokal. Kúntí or Kháti.
burning ground be found that
Goli.
82 sons had been presented to
him. Thus he had now 84 sons and grandsons each of whom founded
a branch of his own, and (a point of special interest) this is why we find
Sindhus among the Chuhſas, Mochis, Barwálás, etc. But ibere are
several variants of this tradition. One runs thus : Wágar had no son, so
a sådhu gave him a lamp of rice for his wife to eat. Sbe gave a grain
to each of her companions who were spinning with her; and each
had a son, so that a Sindhu got was founded in many different castes. A
third only allows 34 true branches of the Sindhus thus : Wágar had
21 sons by his two wives Rup Kaur, daughter of Pheru (forebear of
the Bopá Rai Játs) and Nandan : Kálá Mihr had 7, Kálá Pír, Ghirah,
Pantu, Goli, Chí and Gund Rái, one eacb, i.e. 34 in all. Fifty minor
branches sprang from these. Goli's progeny held the Bhakna
Kalán ke Satára or 17 villages round Bhakna : Mokals live in Lahore
and Khútís in other parts. Chi's descendants hold the Sindhúán ká
Bárá or 12 villages round Dhallú in Lahore. The Sialkot Gazetteer of
1383-4 makes Wágar's name Wazír and only specifies 5 Sindhu muhin's
or septs, viz. Kala, Goli, Gosai, Agdair and Masnad. T'he Sindhus
also hold a panjnanyli (5 villages) near Atárí, and báía or group of 22
villages round Sirháli, whither they migrated from a Lakhim Sirbáli
near Moga 500 years ago.
The Sialkot legend makes Dagu settle at Jagdí Khai near Lahore
under Akbar, and gives the following pedigree:-
DAGU.
Sindhu.
Gún.
Sabi.
Garai Chíní.
Sách.
Goleh.
Hans. Kandari. Gorai.
Káleh Mer. Goseh šopt. Aidla and Makiád zepts.
* More than one tradition points to Shábábád near Khángáh Dográa as the aggiont
capital of the Siodbus under Wágar and his five predecessors. Close to it two mounds,
Shah ká tbeh and Rámdf ka theh, are still pointed ont,



Singhári.
425
Ý A curious legend tells how Sindhu first became king of Ghazni, but
eventually sank to Ját status. The king of Ghazni had no son, so
his wife proposed that all the people should run beneath her palace and
that he on whose head & kurigű kí katori (pot of colour) fell should
be deemed his heir. The pot fell on Sindhu and he became king in
drie course, but be spent much of his time in hunting and on one of
his excursions visited a king, Nib, a Bhullar Ját, with whose daughter
Nathi he fell in love. So he married her and became himself a Ját.
The legendary history of Kálá Mihr makes him a grandson of
Wár, son of Kan. His real name was Jaimal, son of Bogha, and in
the feud between his children and the Bhattis, in what is now Faridkot,
the latter promised to make Kalia Brahman* their priest if he would
kill his master for whom he used to cook. While Jaimal was under
the influence of the drug the Bhattis cut off his head, but he continued
fighting and put his foes to flight. But a dyer taunted them for flying
from a headless enemy until they turned and so Jaimal fell. Hence his
descendants do not wear clothes dyed blue-for he would have
overthrown the Bhattis but for the dyer. The Bhattis still regard
Kalia's descendants as their priests and reverence them. But the
Sindhus employ no Brahman in the cult of Kálá Mihr because
he was slain through the treachery of one of that caste : and, since
Hindus cannot dispense with Brahmans, they reverence the Deogan
who are the daughter's sons of the Kalia Brahmans. The following
lines are current :
Méré marh té Báhman jé chathé, sir wadh karó azád.
Merá te Báhman dá wair hai, jion diwé te jhakar bád,
It manni, nil nahin paihnná, us Sindhu di chaloge mohr chháp.
Mara mania pu da dea Máráwí mua khán pin karan balas.
Kala Mihar giya har bhất.
« If a Brahman look towards my tomb cut him off. A Brahman and
I are enemies as is a draught to a lamp. A. genuine Sindbu Ját is one
who worships bricks and refrains from wearing blue clothes. Every.
thing used in my worship should be given to a Mirásí. Speaking thus
Kálă Mihr died.”
The above verses do not explain why Sindhus never used burnt bricks
till a few years ago, bat the Sindhus say it was because Kálá Mibr's
shrine was built of them.
It is also said that Kálá Mihr was a nyctalops, i.e. that he slept
with his eyes open and vice versâ ! Hence tbe Sindhus are to this day
káni nind and keep their eyes partly open wbile asleep 17
SINGRÁRI, a grower of water-outs (singhára), see Káchhi.
* Mentioned also in the Rajput Bhattis' traditions.
The tradition also mentions Kanda Mirásí and Muhibbu Nai as servants of Kálá Mihr
but does not say what part they played in the tragedy.
† Crowther records another version concerning Kala Mihr or Kála the cowherd. He was
tonding his cattle in the fields and his daughter brought him food. On her way back sho
was captured by some soldiers of the Delhi emperor and Kála fell on them, slaying many,
until his head was severed from his body. Jle fell dead at Sirbálı-fr, sir, head, -and so &
mound was raised at the spot (jathera) round which the bridegroom walks 7 times at his
marriage, doos obeisance and gives alms..



426
Singgh-Sinhmár.
SINÇGH, SINGH, fem. -Ní.— Panjabi Dicty., p. 1057. See Singh.
Sings, see Sangh.
Singh, fem. -Ní, a lion: a follower of the Sikh Gurus who is initiated by
receiving the pahul according to the precepts of Gurú Govind Singh.
As a title the word is affixed to the names of all Sikhs, to those of
Rajputs and some other classes cf. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1057. At initi-
ation into Sikhism the Hindu affixes Mal, Chand, etc., are generally
changed into Singh, thus Rám Chand becomes Rám Singh. But
occasionally an entirely new name is taken, e.g. Rám Chand may be-
come Arjan Singh. On the other hand at accession a Rájput prince
whose name is Singh may be changed into the dynastic suffix of Sain,
Parkash, etc. Singh is comparatively seldom used as a royal affix.
It is assumed in Bashahr at the naming ceremony and is not changed
at accession. In Chamba too it is not changed, bat, both before and
after accession, the ancient suffix Varma is used instead of Singh by
the priests when the ruling chief is referred to by name in any
religious ceremony. In several states, b.g. Kulu, it has in modern
times replaced the much more ancient • Pál. As a Rájput affix 'Singh'
only appears to have come into general use in the 16th century.* A
syncopated form of Singh appears in clan names ending in -si, such as
Wairsi, Bhagsi, Barsi, etc. This syncopated suffix is common in
Rajputána and Central India. See also. under Shin.
The Singhs at one time began to crystallise into territorial groups.
Thus the Sikhs between the Sutloj and the Jumpa-or more probably
those who had overrun the country between those rivers came to be
called Málawa Singhs, a title said to have been conferred on them for
their bravery under Banda Bairági,' who declared that the country
granted to them should be as fruitful as Málwa. The Sikhs of the
Jullundur Doáb were called Doába Singhs, and those of the Rechoa
Doáb Dharpi Smghs. The Sikhs beyond the Jhelum were called Sindh
Singhs, and those of the Nakka or 'border,' the country lying between
the Rávi and the Sutlej, south of Laliore, were called Nakkái.t
Malcolm also called those of Gujrat the Gujrst or Dhani-Gheb Singhs,
but the latter term must have applied to those who had conquered the
tracts to the north of the Salt Range. I
The democratic tendency of Sikhism and its attempts to level away
· all caste distinctions found expression in the adoption of such caste-
designations as NAHERNA SINgo for 'barber,' Taoka SINGH for 'carpen-
ter,' ete.
Singh-a Muhammadan boy who will not work well is so named. P. N.
Q. III, § 765.
SINAMÁR (tiger-slayer'), a Ját got found in small numbers in the villages
of Gatauli, Jajewanti and Bartáná in tahsil Jind and in tahsil Dadri.
Originally Kalhár by got, one of them killed a tiger and acquired the
title of Sinbmár.
* Ind. Ant., 1905, p. 272,
+ This group formed a Bikh misl. It was founded by Híra Singh, a Sikh of Bahrwal in
that tract: Montgomery Gasetteer, 1898-3, p. 87,
Asiatic Resuarches, XI (Malcolm's Sketch of the Sikhs), p. 249.



SipiSohi.
427
Sipi.The weaver of the Gaddi tribes : found in the Barmaur wizárat of the
Chamba State, and virtually the same as the Hálí. A low hill-caste who
are professional sheep-shearers.
SIPRÁ.-The Siprá appear to be a sub-division of the Gill tribe of Játs,
which gives its name to the famous battlefield of Sabráon. They too
are found chiefly on the Jhelum and lower Chenáb and are most
numerous in Jhang, in which District they form a powerful tribe.
There they claim to be of Hindu Rájput origin, and still employ Brah-
mans, or in default a Mirási, for ceremonial purposes. Their wives are
taken from the Chadhrar and Máhún Játs, or sometimes from the Siáls :
but they only give daughters to the Bharwána clan of the latter tribe
or within their own circle.
In the Jhang Bár the Sipras say they came from the east, and marry
with Bharwána Sials. They have been there since the time of Mirza
· and Sábibán.
SIQLÍGAR.—The word Siqlígar is the name of a pure occupation, and denotes
an armourer or burnisher of metal. They are shown chiefly for the
large towns and cantonments in Census tables; but many of them pro.
bably return themselves as Lohárs.
SIQTIAN, a Súfi sect or order which was founded by or named from Khwaja
Sirri Siqti.
SODHAN, a tribe, described as Rájput, found in Rawalpindi,
Sorí, see Súrí.
SOGAL, a clan agricultural found in Shábpur.
Soai, a Gujar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Soší, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SOBAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
The Sohal are said to be of Chauhan Rajput origin, their ancestor
Sobal belonging to the family of Mahág. They appear to lie to the north
of the Kang, close up under and even among the hills ; but they are
also found along the Sutlej, though in smaller numbers.
Sorí, (1) a tribe of Játs, descended through Sohi from Rajá Kang, and found
in Gujranwala and Sialkot. Sohi's descendant Khoti settled in Ludhiana
district in the time of Alá-ud-dín of Ghor and his grandson Bans Pál
founded Sohián Sanián in Amritsar. The Sohi are also found as a Ját
clan (agricultural) in Amritsar and Montgomery.
The jandi'is lopped at weddings, and the bridegroom first strikes
the bride 7 times with the twigs and then she does the same to him.
Loaves made of 10 sers of four are distributed amongst boys and 5
yards of cloth given to a Brahman. The lopper of the tree is paid
according to one's means. The father's elder brother cuts some hair
with scissors. Returning home they play with the kangna. A loaf
is cooked in honour of the Sultán Sakhi Sarwar and a quarter of it
given to a Bharái, the rest being distributed amongst the brotherhood.
(2) a Kharral clan (agricultural) fonnd in Montgomery,
long the way under and abág: Thegrand origin, the



428
SohlasSpin Gund.
Soola, an agricultural olan found in Shabpar.
SOHLAN, 8 olan, generally recognised as Rajputs, found in Jhela m tahuil on
the river and above the town of that name.
SoHu; a clan of the Pachádas and degenerate Chauhan Rajpats. Sajan their
forefather had 9 sons, and the oldest was named Sohä. His descon-
dants became Mubammadans, and some of them are found in Hissár.
SOJÁní, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Solaí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SOLKAA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SOMAą, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Sonál, a Ját tribe which once held Gajnipur or Gajipur, probably the modern
Gajni, 8 miles north of Ráwalpindi: 1. 8. R. II, p. 166.
SoŅbaş, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Sondí, a Ját tribe. Sonodi, a section of the Khatrís. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1067.
Soní, a section of the Khatrís. Panjabi Dictý., p. 1067. See Seoni,
SONTRA, a Ját tribe which uses the Hindu title of Rái. Found in Dera
Gházi Khán where it is probably indigenous or immigrant from the
eastward.
SORI LOND, as it is called to distinguish it from the Tibbi Lund, is &
large Baloca tuman, living in the plains. Their territory divides that
of the Khosa into two parts, and extends to the bank of the Indus. They
are divided into 7 clans, the Haidaráni, Ahmdáni, Kaliani, Zariáni,
Garázwáni or Gudharoáni, Nuháni, and Gurcháni, none of which are
important. Headquarters at Kot Kandiwála.
SORO, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán,
SOȚAR, & Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SOTANAH, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
SOTBAB, a Jáy clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SOTRAK, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
SOTwi, a regularly entertained ploughman, also called háli or åtri in
Amritsar.
Spín GUND, the white faction, as opposed to the Tor Gand or black fac.
tion." These factions prevail to the west of the GÁR* and 8ámil factions.
The Black and White factions are wide-spread, though the conflict
they represent is not necessarily the same everywhere.t For example
Raverty observes :--" It is a custom among eastern people to disa
tinguish countries and sometimes people by the epithets of white and
black, the former name being given to the most extensive or fertile
countries and most civilised people, and the latter to the poorest and
least fertile countries, and the less civilised people. The same may be
remarked with respeot to the term surkh-rú or red-faced, i.e. honour-
able, of good fame, and siyáh-rú, blackfaced, moaning disgraced or
dishonoured." I
. At 0 279 of Vol. II, supra, where in line 4 : Rája Pál' should be read, not • Rájá.'
+ E. . in Kashgaria we find Black and White mountaineers : Kuropatkin'Kashgaria
Gavan's Trans., pp. 102 et seqq.
Raverty's Tabugát..Násiri, p. 918n.



Sthanahwini.
429
Countless legends now profess to explain the origin of these factions.
Thus it is said that Faridűn had three sons, Salem, Iraj and Tur. Out
of his great love to Iraj be assigned Irán to him, giving China Tatar
(i.e. Chinese Tartary) to Tur, (and apparently disinheriting Salem).
Bat Salem and Tur made.common cause against Iraj, whom they killed,
but his descendant Manoch her avenged his death, and for centuries
the war between the fair or spín Iránís and the dark or tor Turánís
was continued. When Hindustan was invaded by the Muhammadans
they carried with them their ancient feuds and factions. But the term
tor came to be applied to the people of the plains, and the Patháns who
visit the Punjab periodically are said to term its inhabitants tor sarai
or dark-complexioned as compared with themselves.
Among the KHATTARS of Rawalpindi there appear to be two branches,
the Black and White, but their origin is very obscure.
The Spín and Tor Gundi properly so-called are, however, confined
to Pathán territory, and the account of their origin current in Peshawar
is as follows:
Qais Abd-ur-Rashid
Sarah Ban
Khar Shabu
Shar Khabun
Tarin
Milna
Tarín
Abdul Spín
Tor
Tarín
The Tarín are only found in Balochistán. The Spín Tarín are not
very pumeroas, and are found in the Zorab valley Dear Thal. The
Tor Tarín, who are pumerous, are found in Peshír.
The Bannúchi are divided into Tor and Spín grinds. It is said that
the lands to the south of the Tochi river were inhabited by a tribe
called Tórá, which endeavoured to settle towards the north of the
Tochi, but were prevented by Sarkai and Ibrahim, descendants of
Nugrah Dín the Bárakzai. Eventually, however, they conspired with
Sarkai and with his connivance succeeded in settling on the north
of the Tochi as peaceful neighbours of the Barakzai Míranzai Afgháns
apparently). Since then these two factions have been styled Tor, from
the south, and Spín, from the north. This tradition seems to preserve
the history of an invasion of a dark southern race from the modern
Balochistan into the lands north of the Tochi which were held by lights
complexioned mountaineers.
But a more prosaic explanation is that as black is used of poor,
infertile countries and white for fertile and cultivated territories, so
'black' is applied to savage and 'white' to civilised peoples.*
STHÁNAKWÁSI, the non-idolatrous Shwetambar Jains, nicknamed Dhundias,
who claim to be the real followers of Jainism in its original form.
They regard the idolatrous Shwetambar as the real Jains but unorthodox,
.Of. Thorburn's Bannu, p. 17.



430
Suáni-Súd.
and the Digambaras as a later development. They worship no
images :-Punjab Census Rep., 1912, § 229.
Soání, a woman of noble family among Rajputs. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1069 :
cf. Sáhú.
Súv, SÚDÁ, Súdaí, a class of traders and clerks. (?= Súdar, fem. -Ní).
Panjabi Dicty., pp. 1071-2.- The Súds are almost entirely confined to
the lower hills, and the districts that lie immediately under them as
far west as Amritsar. Their headquarters are at Ludhiana and the
neighbouring town of Máchhíwára, and they are apparently unknown
outside the Punjab. They are almost wholly mercantile in their
pursuits though occasionally taking service as clerks, and occupy a
social position markedly inferior to that of either the Bánia or the
Khatri. They wear a janeo or sacred thread made of three instead of
six strands, and many of them practise widow-marriage. With the
exception of a few who are Sikhs they are almost all Hindu, but are,
in comparison with the other mercantile castes, very lax in the
observance of their religion. They indulge freely in meat and wine,
and in habits, customs, and social position resemble very closely the
Káyaths. The tribe is apparently an ancient one, but no definite in.
formation as to its origin is obtainable. Folk etymology has been busy
with the name of Súd: one tradition is that a rishi Súrat espoused the
daughter of a Chhatrí Rájá and founded the caste ;- but others say it
means 'cartman,'' baker' (sut). The following is a popular tale as to
the origin of the Súds :- A man of low caste owed money to a Bánia and
after a few years they settled the account. The principal was paid
by the debtor, but he would not pay interest; so he agreed to give
his wife to his creditor. Her children by the Bánia were called Súd
'interest.' In time the Súds began to intermarry with the high castes,
and now are considered of high caste like Bánias. Sir Denzil Ibbetson's
attempt to make inquiries from some leading Súds resulted in the
assembling of a panchayat, the ransacking of the Sanskrit classics for
proof of their Kshatriya origin, and a heated discussion in the journal
of the Anjuman-i-Punjab.
The Súds of Ludhiana at any rate are divided into two main groups, the
Uchándia or Súd of the hills and the Newandia or Súd of the plains.
They also distinguish the Súds who do not practise widow marriage
from those who do, calling the former khara, and the latter and their
offspring gola, doghla (hybrid) or chichar These two groups, of which
the latter corresponds exactly with the Dasa and Gâta Bánias, do not
intermarry. The Súds forbid marriage in a!l four gots, and here again
show how much lese their tribal customs have been affected by their
religion than have those of the Bánias and Khatris. They are of good
physique, and are an intelligent and enterprising caste with great
power of combination and self-restraint; and they have lately made
what appears to be a really successful effort to reduce their marriage
expenses by general agreement. The extensive sugar trade of Ludbiána,
and generally the agricultural money-lending of the richest part of
that district are almost entirely in their hands. They are proverbially
acute and prosperous men of business, and there is a saying: “If a
Súd is across the river, leave your bundle on this side." The hus-
bandman of the village is a mere child in their hands.
of Of cours to be ulagre.culture



Súda--Súfi.
431
The Súds have 52 gots, including the Augarh, Baddhu and Baggha,
descendants of Lála Hari Chand, and the following:---
Babl.
Dbúp.*
Mukandi.
Balaygan.
Dosáj.
Nahra.
Barhmi.
Dullt.
Nandú.
Bardwál.
Gach,
Phakka.
Bassan.
Gájri.
Pharwaha.
Báwari,
Gondal.
Pbassí.
Beri,
Gopál.
Pura,
Bbarák.
Jári.
Rori,
Bbukába.
Kajlá.
Roríá.
Bhulla,
Khurpa.
Sallan.
Bodbí.
Laú.
Saraf.
Daddan,
Mandal.
Saunl.
Dewar.
Mahni,
Tagála.
Dhalli.
Máhyar,
Tejí.
Dhanda,
Makaura,
Udher.
Dbiri.
Mídhar.t
Ugál.
Dhúkbí.
Moman. I
1. In Hindustan and the Deccan the Raikwårs (Rai Kumárs) are said to be descend.
ants of Súd emigrants.
SÚDA, Huda, see p. 334, Vol. II, supra.
The Súda Játs in Márwár and Bíkáner possess the gift of being able
to ipoculate for small-pox. The gift was conferred on their ancestor
by Mahadevi, and members of this tribe are now found scattered about
the country, practising inoculation throughout a large tract which in-
cludes all Márwar and Bíkáner. S
SUDARKHEL, see under Isperka.
Súrí, fem. -AN : one of the class of Muhammadan free-thinkers, mystics or
pantheists : one who uses nothing intoxicating. Panjabi Dicty., p.
1072,
The term is generally derived from Ar, súf, ' wool,' but it is pro-
bably a corruption of the Greek sophos, wise. Any discussion of
the Súfi doctrines and practices must be reserved for the introductory
volume, but below will be found a list of the Súfi schools, orders and
sects, as they may be styled, provided no very precise definitions of
those terms is postulated.
It is usually said that the Súfi orders are 14 in number. These
are :
The Ajmi founded by, or named after, Khwája Habib Ajmi, the
Ayázi from Khwaja Fuzáil, son of Ayáz, whose shrine is at Kufa, the
Adhamí, from Khwája Ibrahim Kbán, whose sbride is at Baghdad, the
CHISHTI, the HUBAIKI, the KAZRÓNI, the Tosi, the SUHARWARDI, the
Firdúsi from S. Najm-ud. Din Firdos, the KARKOI, the QADIRI, the
SIQTI, the NAQSHBANDI and the ZAJDI.
Of these orders, the oldest is the Qadria, founded about 1100 A. D.
by Abdul Qadir Jilani, the Pir Dastgír whose shrine is at Baghdad,
a descendant of Ali, through the martyr Hasan, according to the
* Among the Dhúp got the sale of milk, curds or ghi is prohibited and even their weigh-
ment in scales is interdicted.
| For Mahidbar.
| For Mohman.
SP. N. Q. II, § 152,



The Rai n, Phe SUBARU Sáfichband
432
Suharwardi.
genealogies preserved in India, and while it appears certain, on the
one hand, that the order is, historically, a Shia development, on the
other it is undoubtedly connected with Sufism, Abdul Qadir being
reverenced by the Sufis.*
But, according to Ibbetson, most of the Sunni divines of the North-
West frontier are Qadiri, and the Akhund of Swát belongs to the order.
They sit for hours repeating the following declaration : " Thou art the
guide, Thou art the truth, there is none but Thee !" !
The Qádria sect has had several branches in India, as, for example,
the Muqimia, PAKRAHMÁNIA and NAUSHÁÐI. Closely connected with
the Qádria is the SUHARWARDI order. From this order again branched
off the JALÁLIS. Another Súfi order, sometimes described as one of
the 32 Shia sects, is the Naqshbandi or mystics.* Its foundation is
sometimes ascribed to Pír Muhammad whose tomb is in the Kasar-i-
Urfán at Bokhára and who appears to have flourished in Persia about
1300 A. D., but Khwaja Báhá-ud-Din is more generally regarded as its
originator. According to Maclagan the sect was introduced into India
by Shaikh Ahmad Sirhindi whose priestly genealogy is traced back to
Abu Bakr the first Caliph. Last, but not least, comes the Chisbtia sect,
founded in Khorásán, and revived in the 13th century by Khwája
Farid-ud-Din Shakar-Ganj, in the Punjab, in which province it has
fifteen gaddis or shrines.
And yet again from this sect branched off the Nizamias or disciples
of Khwaja Nizam-ud-Din, Aulia Dehlavi, or Muhammad-bin-Ahmad
Daniál, a disciple of Khwaja Farid-ud-Din Shakar-Ganj. This sect
does not appear in our Census returns.
The Muqimia or Mugim-Shábi are followers of Shah Muqim of
Hujra in Montgomery. Its founder was a Qádiri, and he himself
conformed to the rules of that order, but some of its present adherents
do not follow them.
The Qádiri shrines in the Punjab come next to those of the
Chíshtis in importance and number. They include such shrines as
that of Khwaja Qumais at Sádhora in Ambála. A characteristic story
describes how Rai Raw Deo, a Bhatti Rájput of Kapurthala, held the
tract round Batála (now iu Gurdaspur) in farm under Bahlol Khan
Lodi in 1472 A. D. He became a disciple of Shaikh Muhammad
Qadiri of Lahore and founded a town, but, as the site first chosen was
considered inauspicious, it was changed, at the astrologers' advice, to
the present site of Batála which derives its name from the exchange-
batta or vatta.
DHARWARDI, a Súfi sect founded by Shaikh Shibá huddín Saharwardi
who came to India and is buried in the Fort of Maltán. He was !
spiritual brother to Shaikh Sádi, the great poet of Persia, as the follow-
ing verses show:-
My spiritual guide, Shiháb, gave ine two lessons while I was
standing at the river bank. The first was that I should not admire
the According to some authorities one of the earliest leaders of this sect was Háji
Bektash, who was succeeded by Khoja Ahmad; the Bektash, also called Qizal-bách
or Kizzilbásh, appear, however, as a separate sect or order of the Shias in the list giren
by Cooke Taylor in his History of Muhammadanism..



433
Sukhera-Sulaimán Khël.
myself, and the second was that I should not find fault with others."
This proves that Sádi was a disciple of Khwaja Shibáb. Khwaja
Bahauddin Suharwardi Multáni was another disciple of his. There are
very few Suharwardi shrines in India.
SUKBERA, a branch of the Pachádas, descended from Tunwar Rajputs of
Bahuna. Thripál, their forefather, having eloped with a low-caste
Jatni, was outcasted by his brethren and migrated to Basti Bhima and
thence to Kakar-Thana, in Sirsa, on the banks of the Sutlej. But his
descendants regarding Bahuna as their ancestral place went back there.
Their principal men now dwell in Basti Bhima and Bígar and there are
about 25 other villages in Hissár where these Pachádas are to be met
with, eitber as proprietors or cultivators. They are called Sukheras
because they descended from Sakha, Thripal's son. They are also
known as Hendalka or descendants of Hendal Khán.
SOKROBAKIA, the seventh of the Sikh misls or confederacies, which was
recruited from Jágs.
SULAIMÁNÍ, see Shilmáni.
SULAIMÁN KHKL, & Pathán tribe chiefly found in Dera Ismail Kbán. Its
eponym had the following descendants :-



SULAIMAN.
Ismail,
Shamal.
Khaisar.
Ahmad *
Bablol.
Saráz.
Landai. Ghaibi, Qalandar. Jani. Saleh. Sultán. Jalal. Kbarwar Dinar, Zankai. Mir Kamran. Parin. Yahya. Hasan
Din.
Rhan.
Khan.
Baskhathai.
Jalál.
Sulaimán Khel pedigree.
Hila.
Hila.
Nizám.
Saland.
Saddo.
Chisi.
Vesi.
Painda. Sangin. Mahmud. Babi. Shaikh. Sarwan. Rama. Khoedau.
Sons of Kbaisar were-
O
Adaa.
Nao.
Satur.
Kajhkai.
Mamur.
Mitha.
Begb.
Mallai.
Mallu.
Sahib Din.
Hanzkai.
Gul..
Batin.
* The Ahmadzais, tue main branch of the Sulaiman Khel tribe, reside in the neighbourhood of Speiga and Logar in Afghánistan.



Sulki-Sultáni.
435
According to Tucker the Sulaimán Khels are the most numerous
and powerful of all the Pawindabs, the name covering not only the
Sulajmán Khels proper, but a number of allied clans all belonging to
the great Ghilzai tribe. The Sulaimán Khels occupy a great extent
of country stretching from Peshin and Khalát-i-Ghilzai nearly as far
as Jalálábad, though those of them who come down into British
territory reside for the most part in the hills lying east of Ghazni, The
number of these probably averages about 12,000. Most of them are
charra folk but they own altogether only about 4,000 camels. They
bring but little merchandise with them, but great numbers of them go
down country, especially to Calcutta, where they act as go-betweens or
dalláls, buying goods from the inerchants there and selling them to
other Pawindahs. They bring back their profits for the most part in
cash. Those who stop in Dera Ismail Khán work as labourers. They
generally come and go about the same time as the Kharotis, but a few
days before or after, ou account of the feud between the tribes. The
Sulaimán Khels are fine strong men. They have the character of
being rather a set of rascals, though on the whole they behave them-
selves very fairly while in British territory. They have 9 kirris located
at Amákhel, Mulazai and in the neighbourhood of Tank and Kuláchi
but the population attached to them is not a third of the whole number
of Sulaimán Khels who enter. One of these kirris disappeared, the
men belonging to it having been nearly all killed in a fight between
them and our troops during the suppression of the disturbances in
Tánk in January 1879.
SOLKI, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
SOLTání, ·íá, fem, -AN. (Panjábi Dicty., p. 1078).—A follower of Sultán
Sakhi Sarwar, also (and perhaps more commonly) known as Sarwaria,'
and other names, such as, Nigahia, Lakhdáta, Dhaunkalia, (fr. Dhaunkal.
near Wazírábád, one of the halting places of the bauds of pilgrims
whicli visit the shrine of Sakhi Sarwar at Nigiha in Dera Gházi
Khán every year). The only distinguishing features of the Sarwarias
are (i) their abstinence from jhatka (i. e. they will not eat any meat
except that prepared in the halál method prescribed for Muhamma-
dans), and (ii) the observance of jumarát (Thursday), when charitable
doles are given in connection with vows made for the fufilment of
certain desires. The term may mean either :-(1) A follower of the
Saint Sultán Sakhi Sarwar of Nigába, and especially a bard who sings
songs in his honour, also (2) a title taken by the descendants of a
Siddhu Ját lady called Wání, who came from Lándeke in the Moga
tahsil of Ferozepur which is still held by her descendants and had
her son miraculously restored to life by Sakhi Sarwar-a tale told in a
well-known song.
The cult of Sarwar is described in Vol. I, but the account of his
followers' observances from the Punjab Census Report of 1892, may be
reproduced here :
The observances of the Sultánis. --The village shrines of Sarwar are
known as Pirkhánas, or Sultán da thaun, or nigáha, or merely as thoun
or jagah; they are unpretending little edifices, to be seen outside
nearly every hamlet in the central Districts. The shrine is a hollow
plastered brick cube, eight to ten feet in each direction, covered with a
dome some 10 or 12 feet bigh, and with low minarets or pinnacles at the



438
The Sultánias.
four corners and a doorway in front opening out generally on a plastered
brick platform. Facing the doorway inside, are two or three niches
for lamps, but otherwise the shrine is perfectly empty. The saint is
especially worshipped on Thursdays, when the shrine is swept, and at
night lamps are lit inside it. The guardians of the shrines are Musal-
máns of the BAARAI order, who go round on Thursdays beating drums
and collecting offerings. These offerings, which are generally in small
change or small handfuls of grain or cotton, are mainly presented by
women. Another mệthod of pleasing the saint is by vowing a rot : the
rot is made by placing dough to the extent vowed on Xhot piece of
earth, where a fire has been burning, and distributing it when baked.
A special rot ceremony is also performed once a year on a Friday in
most Sultání families. A huge loaf is cooked containing & kaccha
maund of flour and half-a kaccha maund of gur, The Bharai attends
and beats tho drum, and sings the praises of the saint while it is
preparing. Wben it is ready he gets a quarter and the family with
their neighbours eat the rest. The saint is also worshipped by sleeping
on the ground instead of on a bed ; this is called chauki - bharná.
Wrestling matches (ching bájáni) are also held in his honour, and the
offerings made to the performers go towards keeping up the shrine
at Nigáha. A true worshipper of Sultán too will not sell milk on
Tbursday; he will consame it himself or give it away, but will not
sell it.
Sarwar is essentially a saint of the Játs, and the worship of Sarwar,
which is, I believe, practically unknown outside the Punjab, is within
that Province the prevalent cult of the central or Ját districts. The
Jhíuwars, Gujars and the lower castes generally are also devoted to this
saint: but among the women who are his chief worshippers even
Khatránís and Brahmanís are found. In Karnál his chief worshippers
are Gujar and Rájput women, who keep his festival on the Salono day
in the month of Sáwan. In the Delhi territory the saint is not popular
as in the Punjab proper, but still, according to Ibbetson, he is even
there 'generally worshipped ; shrines in his honour are common; vows
and pilgrimages to him are frequent, and Brabmans tie threads on the
wrists of their clients on a fixed date in his name.'
Anybody of any caste, even & Chamár, may call himself a
worshipper of Sarwar, and persons of all religions and all castes, more
especially the Játs and Jhíowars, are his followers. The saint confined
himself to performing miracles and seems never to have deviated into
anything approaching to a verbal creed or doctrine, or even to a compo.
sition of any kind, and consequently his following is larger than that of
most saints in the Province. The Sultání way reverence the Prophet, oi
he may worship Devi and the 33 crores of Hindu deities without ceasing
to be a Sultání. He may smoke as much as he likes and dress his
hair as he pleases. The only observance which distinguishes Sarwar's
Hindu followers from the ordinary Hindus is that they will not eat the
meat of animals which have been killed by jhatka or a blow on the back
of the neck. The Sultání, if he eats meat at all, must eat animals
whose throat has been cut in the orthodox Musalmán manner. This
accounts for the fact that comparatively fow Sikhs are followers of
Sarwar, and there is in fact a sort of opposition in the central districts
between Sikhs and Sultánís. You hear men say that one party in a



Sultánia-Sumbal.
437
On verithis appesist batam the
a man. d Friday, and thes of killing animatic
village worships the Guru, the other worships Sarwar; that is, that one
party are Sikhs, the other ordinary Hindus who follow Sarwar. It has
been suggested that the worship of Sarwar probably spread oaetword
among the Játs in the 15th and 16th centuries, and was the prevalent
cult at the time of the great development of Sikhism in the days of
Guru Gobind Singh ; and that raost of the conversions to the Khálsa
faith were from the worshippers of Sultan. This appears a very
probable account of the origin of such opposition as does exist between
these two forms of faith. As between the Hindus generally and the
Sultání there is no sort of opposition ; there are instances in the popular
legends of men opposing the cult of Sarwar,* but in the present day
the Sultánís are looked on as ordinary Bindus, with a special preference
for a certain saint who happens to have been & Musalmán. Except
on the question of jhatka, there is vothing sectarian in their principles
or their conduct.
It is the want of a distinctive creed that has rendered the Sultání
cult so popular, but none the less there are, as we have seen, not a fow
points about the observances of Sarwar's followers that indicate a
semi-concession to Islám. The saint Sarwar himself was a Musalmán
and never pretended to be anything else. His priests, the BHARAIS,
are Musalmáns almost to a man. His followers, like the Musalmáns,
pay special respect to Thursday and Friday, and their only distinctive
prejudice is their opposition to non-Musalman modes of killing animals
for food. This strange worship, unsectarian in its creed, and plastic
in its observances, is doubtless of little importance enough from a
religious or political point of view; but it is remarkable as a survival
of the period when Hinduism was waping before that Muhummadan
influence which was shortly to effect such curious lines of reformation
within the pale of Hinduism itself.
SOMBAL, SONBAL, SUNBHAL. A tribe of the Niázı Patháds, remnants of which
are still found in Mianwali. It was nearly exterminated in the reign
of Sher Shah under the following circumstances :-When Haibat
Khán, the A'zam. Humáyún, was governor of Multán and of that
part of the Punjab which belonged to the Delhi empire, Sher Shah
nominated his nephew Mubárak Khán to the charge of tbat part of
Roh which was in the Niázis' possession. At that time Khwaja Khizr,
a Sumbal Niázi, dwelt on the banks of the Indus near Mahkad in a fort
which he made over to Mubárak Khán. The latter heard of the
beauty of a Sumbal's daughter and demanded her band. It was refused,
but other Sumba! brides were offered him, but tbese he declined. Thon
Mubarak Khán was told that the fact of his mother's being a
slave girl was the obstacle to the union which he desired. In his
mortifcation he began to oppress the Sumbals. He carried off the
daughter of one of their house-born slaves and refused to give her up.
The affair ended in Mubarak Khán's being slain by the Sumbal youth
and Sher Shah entrusted the duty of punishing the tribe to Haibat
Khán, himself a Sumbal, observing that the family of Súr was few in
numbers and if every other Afghán should slay a Súr, not one would
survive. Hearing of Haibat Khan's advance the Sambals sought
a retreat in Push or Pusht, determining to withdraw to Kábul, so Haibat
uismitsole.Rect such beformarkable couche romanti
slave girl wand began to open slaves and in by the Sum bal Waibat
* See Tomple's Legends of the Punjab, I, pp. 67 and 74, II, p. 108.



438
Sumra--Sumre.
Khán decoyed them back by an oath that he would not affict them, but
he treacherously put 900 of them to death at Bahír (? Bhera). The
Niázis offered those of the tribe who were related to them an opportunity
of escape, but they refused it and perished with their fellow tribesmen.*
Again in 1662-3, in the reign of Aurangzeb, the Sumbals, then
settled on the west of the Indus, held also Dhankoţ to the east of that
river. Aurangzeb instructed his faujdár to remove them altogether
to the west bank, but they returned and attacked the imperial thána
or military post on the east bank and slow the thánadár. The Master
of the Ordnance was deputed to punish them and thongh most of them
recrossed the Indus a portion stood their ground and were killed. The
State's share in the booty amounted to two lakhs of rupees.
SUMRA, one of the Ját tribes of the Western Plains.--The late Mr. E.
O'Brien described the Súmra as originally Rájputs :-"In A, D, 750 they
expelled the first Arab invaders from Sindh and Multán, and furnished
the country with a dynasty which ruled in Multán from 1445 to
1526 A.D., when it was expelled by the Samma, another Rájput tribe'; "
and Tod describes them as one of the two great clans Umra and Súmra
of the Soda tribe of Punwár Rájputs, who in remote times held all the
Rájputána deserts, and gave their names to Umrkot and Umrasumra or
the Bhakkar country on the Indus. He identifies the Soda with
Alexander's Sagdi, the princes of Dhát. The Súmra seem to have
spread far up the Sutlej and Chenáb into the central districts of the
Punjab as they hold a great portion of the Leia thal between the Jhang
border and the Indus. In Bahawalpur the Sumrás are not very
numerous and are confined to the Lamma. Few own land, and the
majority are tenants, while others are blacksmiths, carpenters,
boatmen or barbers. After their overthrow by the Sammás tradition
says that only those men of the tribe escaped massacre who declared
themselves to be artizans or menials, and so many of them were killed
that nearly all the women were widowed, and hence no Sumra wife to
this day wears a nose-ring, for the tribe is still mourning its losses.
The main Sumra septs in this State are :-
(i). Bhattar,
(ii). Kakkik.
(iii). Khatri, found in Kárdári Sáligábad, are washermen by trade so that
Khatri has become a general term for dhobi.
(iv). Bhákhri.
(13). Ghaleja, divided into (i) the khális or pure Ghalejas, and (ii) sixteen sub.
septs Yaráni, Sáda, Lalla, Lutbrá, Kuddan, Jári, Gohạri, Kekri, Láng,
Natbázi, Chhatáni, Midáni, etc.
The Ghalejas, who are found in the Lamma, claim to be Abbásis by
origin, but they appear to be a branch of the Sammás which migrated
from Haidarabad in Sind and settled in the Lammy in the time of the
Náhars, and their ancestor Lal Khán founded Gauspur, naming it after
Gaus Bahá-ud-Din Zakariya of Multán, his religious guide. The
recogaised chiefs of the Ghalejas receive nazrána on a marriage or birth
of a son from all the members of the Ghaleja septs.
SUMRE, an Aráín clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
* Elliot, Hist. of India, IV, pp. 428-32 gives. a :somewhat free translation of the
pieturesque account of this episode related in the Tárikh-i-Sher Sháhi.



Sunár.
439
SUNÁB, SUNára, SUNIÁR, SUNIÁRÁ, SUNIÁRÍ, SUNERA, SUNIÁR, fen. -í or -AN.
Panjabi Dicty., p. 1080. The goldsmith caste. Zargar is the Persian
translation of the name. The Shamsi3 are very commonly goldsmiths.
The Sunár or Zargar as he is often called in the towns, is the gold.
and silver-smith and jeweller of these Provinces. He is also to a very
large extent a money-lender, taking jewels in pawn and making
advances upon them. The practice, almost universal among the
villagers, of hoarding their savings in the form of silver bracelets and
the like makes the caste, for it would appear to be a true caste, an
important and extensive one; it is generally distributed throughout
the Province, and is represented in most considerable villages. The
Sunár is very generally a Hindu throughout the Eastern Plains and
the Salt Range tract, though in the Multán division and on the frontier
he is often a Musalmán. In the central division there are a few Sikh
Sunárs. The Sunár prides himself upon being one of the twice-born,
and many of them wear the janeo or sacred thread; but his social
standing is far inferior to that of the mercantile and of, most of the
agricultural castes, though superior to that of many, or perhaps of
all other artisane. In Delhi it is said they are divided into the Dase
who do and the Deswále who do not practise karewa, and that the
Deswála Sunár ranks immediately below the Bánia. This is probably
true if a religious standard be applied ; but it may be said that a Ját
looks down upon the Supár as much below him.
The Sanár has more than one synonym, He is called Mitar as one
created from dirt because of the following legend, current in Gujrát:
Once upon a time Durga Devi fought with a demon whose whole body
was of gold. Failing to overcome him she made an effigy of a human
being out of the dirt of her body, breathed life into it and so made of it
a goldsmith whom she bade kill the demon. He polished one of the
demon's nails with a file and it shone so that the demon was delighted
and asked the goldsmith to polish his whole body. He rejoined that
this could only be done if his whole body were first heated in the fire.
To this the demon agreed, and the goldsmith maile a heap of firewood
and put four lumps of lead on it. Then he made the demon lie down and
place bis joints on the lead. More fuel was piled on top of him and set
on fire. The lead affected his joints because it is the property of lead to
eat away gold whey placed in the fire. Thus the demon was killed, and
the goddess was so pleased that ever since tbe name of Máipotra (the
son of the goddess) or Deviputra bas been applied to the goldsmith,
The Sunárs of Nábha affect Bhairon as well as Devi, and those
of Báwal worship their sati also. The latter alone practise widow
remarriage.
The caste has two main sub-castes, Mair, Mahar or Maipotra and
Tánk, which appear to be strictly endogamous.* The Mair claim to be
* In Gujrát the Mair are said to be called Sodbra or Sudhra, and the Tánk Khákhar.
Each is said to have 52 sections, viz. :-
Sodhra : Gund, Kapúr, Kukke, Kukkar, Manie, Masaun, Tarame, Vaid, etc.
Kbákhar: Babbar, Dhamme, Ludhar, Masaun, Nichal, Saidure, etc.
The grouping in Nábba is peculiar and is thus described :-
Khány or division.
Khánp or division,
1. Khatri ,
of Brahman origin :
4. Mirf (Mair) of Rájput origin
2. Ohbatris
5. Tánk of Khatri origin.
8. Bahmaniya wear the janeo.
6. Mehúr of unknown origin.



440
The Mair Sunárs.
Mair Rájputs, of Rájputána, who took to working as goldsmiths. In
support of this claim the Mair and Tánk Kshatriya Rajput Sahaik
Sabha, a representative association of the caste, furnished in 1901 some
particulars of interest. The Roda section is still ministered to by the
Dhanmya Acharya, who cut off the ear of the horse at the Aswa-
medba of Yudhistra, and at the rít or chúrakaran ceremony the ear of
a goat is still cut off by the family priest.* The Masaun section,
especially, worships Guga. Other Mair sections are the Dhalla (flag.
holder), Jaura (twin), Sinh (tiger), Babar (lon); Súr (hero) and many
others, some 56 in all. Of these the Jaura claim kinship with the
Chbína Jats and they exchange ajaran jor presents of food on certain
occasions, at Thatta Chbína near Wazírábád. T'he Jaura, Siph and
Súr sections all claim a common descent with the Randbáwa, Nijjar
and Sara Játs, and this is consistent with the claim to Rajput origin, for
the Chbína, Kurutána and Sará Játs are said to be by origin Jádu-
bansi Rájpats.
THE MAIR SUB-CASTE.
The Mair are confinect to the Punjab Proper, and are not found
settled in Kulú or Dera Ismail Khán. Some of their section names are
thus accounted for :
(0) Tbe Bagge olain descent from Ráu Chbabilá of Delhi whose
complexion was baggâ, which means white in Papjábi whence this
name.
(2) The Dhuna or Dhanna section says that the Chandrbansi
Rajputs once ruled at Tolandi (? Talwandi) near Delhi and that of the
two sons of Abu, one of their line, Dhelo took to agriculture, while
Dhuna worked as a goldsmith. Both brothers settled at Bhaçoer and
had the same family priests and bards. They still hold their Brabmans
and Mírásis in greater esteem than any other of their menial attendants,
and preserve some old Rájpat customs like the Roda.
(3) The Jaurá derive their origin from the simultaneous birth of &
boy and a serpent, jaura.' The serpent died but the boy survived, and
the Sunárs of this got still reverence the serpent. Their tradition is
that Siyám or Shám Rájput of Bhatner, had two brothers, Káku and
The last three need not wear a janeo. All the 6 khánps are said to be endogamous, but
as only the Mair and Tánk are found in this State nothing can be said with any certainty
about the other khánps. The Mair claim superiority on the ground that they cannot take
water from the Tánk and other khánps. Some of the gots are :
Mair.
Pánk
1. Dabm.
4. Brajpál.
1. Ast.
4. Jahlú.
2. Gajjar. 5. Ajipal.
2. Dalal.
5. Khorme.
8. Khormo. l. 6. Bahruwal. T 3. Masáwan.
6. Sidhe.
7. Bag-Hel."
The ancestor of the Roda was a Rajput named Uch-bhuj who rebelled in the time of
Aurangzeb and shut himself up in the fort of Uch which 'lay 100 miles from Gakbar
towards Jhang, and 7 miles from the bank of the Trimu river.' He held out for three
months but was forced to surrender. The priests of the Roda say that they thon took to the
worship of Durga, a Rájput cult, and that by favour of the goddess the emperor employed
them to mint silver coins. After their release from captivity the Roda were nick named
Bhutta, and some entered the army while others, having learnt to make coins, took to
making ornaments. The reading of the gotrachár at weddings is citod as a further proof
that the Roda aro Chhatri Rájputs. Various customs now-a.days observed by thom, vis.,
jandi cutting, arming oneself with a sword at marriage, or cutting the right ear of a ho.
goat at the ceremony of rit, etc., are claimed to be old Rajput customs.



The Tank Sunárs.
441
Budhu and 18 sons, including Jaura and Chhina--88 their gotrachar
still sung at weddings, relates :-
At the end of the Dwápar Yuga was born Krishna the incarnation (of God).
In the line of Yádu Bans was born Krishna the incarnation (of God),
In the line of Krishna was born Vatsa, the chieftain, I describe the dynasty of Kaku,
Budhu and Sh4m; Shám bad thirteen sons, heroic and mighty.
Among them was born Jaura the leader. When Jaura emigrated, the tribe's home was
Bhatner.
Born of Shám he occupied Chhina.
There were Chhina, Sukal, Kurutina and Sará, and his younger was Jaura Rai.
Their family Brahman was a Khindarya, their barber a Janda, mirási a Bhim, shoemaker
a Waru, carpenter a Waddar, potter a shokal, and sweeper a Bágri. All of them came
with Jaura.
lo other words whep Jaura and Chhina migrated they were accom-
panied by their hereditary dependents. And, in order to secure their
allegiance, they used to give them, in addition to a dae provision for
their families, ajaran (a fixed quantity of food given only to the members
of a family on the occasion of a rit, a córemony observed alize on the
birth or yagyor avit of a (male) child by which the patriarchs sought to
win the good will of their menials, who would sacrifice their lives for
their masters. But the latter could not accept ajaran from their
monials, for to have done so would have been to treat them on an
equality.
After this the brothers, or their descendants, assigned the goldsmith's
craft to the children of Jaura, and agriculture to those of Chhina. The
descendants of some of their menials are still to be found in this
locality and their sections are named after the ancestors who accom-
pavied Jaura and Chhína. Except these no other menials are allowed
to accept this ajaran.
(4) The Magán or Masaun claim their descent from a child born
when his mother becaine satti at the chhalá or masán, 'burning place..
(5) The Nicbal trace their origin to the Jádu clan of the Bhatti
Rájputs. They too hold their Mírásis and parohits in high esteem.
They say that the Súr, Shin and Jaura Sunárs are all descended from
& Rája Jandhan, as are the Randháwa, Sará and Nijjar Játs. They too
observe some old Rájput customs.
(8) The Plaud claim descent from a saint Pallava whose name is
derived from pallava, or 'leaf,' owing to his worshipping beneath the
leaves of a banyan tree.
(0) The Shín also claim descent from Rájputs, of a family called
Shin, and they too say that Bhatner was their original home. The
burning place of their ancestors is believed to be at Ranghewala. Like
the Jaura and Maldolia sections the Shín claim to be Bhattis by origia
and affinity with the Randhawa, Sidhu, Sarai and other Játs.
THE TANK SUB-CASTE.
This sub-caste is divided into two main groups :-
Group I.-BÁRI-
1. Ajimal, or Ajaimal. 15. Samanial.
9. Khich.
2. Ahat.
6. Pajji,
10. Hachar,
2. Gijjar or Gujar. - 7. Teji.
11. Batru.
4. Thathre, or Thothre. 1 8. Salgotria.
18, Raltre,



442
The Tánk Sunárs.
Of these the Samanial appear to be extinct. Another account gives
Kaun, Kokal, Katarmal and Gidar instead of Nos. 11 and 12 of
the above list (or 14 sections in all), but the three latter appear to be
really Bunjáhi.
It is claimed for the Bári gots that they agree with the Bári sections
of the Khatris, but it is admitted that only one of the names (Patoi*)
agrees. The corresponding sections of the Khatris are stated to be
as follows, but on what grounds this correspondence is assumed does
not appear :--
Sunár Khatrí.
Sunár Khatri.
(1) Ajil = Hánde.
(7) Ratre : Chopre.
Ahu = Kbiodre.
(8) Gijar = Chahde.
(3) Khich = Sabgal.
(9) Patni = Patni.
(4) Salgoti = Ohri.
(10) Teji = Sekhri.
Huchar = Nijjar.
(11) Thothre = Ohri.
(6) Pajji = Seth.
(12) Smani = Mohindrú.
Out of these 12 the last has died out No. 9 is the only one that
has not lost its original name.
· This equation is put forward to show that the Bári Tánks were
originally Khatris and changed the names of their sections after they
had adopted the profession of a goldsmith. The Siálkoļi Bunjáhis,
who have only four sections, were originally Soni Khatris.
The Bári wear the janeo, at least before marriage, and some sections
reverence the kite at the maunan or head shaving ceremony like
certain Khatri sections.
In Sialkot, however, the Bári group does not seem to be known and
instead we have two groups :-
Sections.
1.-Dhaighar ... ...
51. Dahir.
3. Nági.
II.-Bunjáhi-Par ... . 2. Bhola.
4. Ved.
The Dhaighar, though descended from a common ancestor, usually
intermarry, but they may take girls from the Bunjáhi. Their ancestors
were three brothers of the Soni section of the Khatris, and they and
the Soni “still have a common Sati at Bhalan in Sialkot.
Group. II.-BunJÁ.1.--The sub-groups of the Bunjáhi are also
qariously described :
1. Bhopal.
Į 3. Botan.
Sub-group i, Panj.záti ...
12. Bhatti.
14. Thanda.
il. Sauni.
14. Ajarmila
Sub-group ii, Chhe-záti
2. Dhanda:
5. Sanjogi.
(3. Ajaji.
16. Möhra.
But another account omits Sauni.
In Dera Ismail Khán tbê Búnjáhi are divided into sub-groups, thus:--
(1. Sarna, 5. Kan.
2. Dhanda.
6. Makhu.
Sub-group i, Khatri
... ... ... ) 3. Ajoti.
7. Nakra.
(4. Akasmula. - 1 8. Bhel.
* And even this name does not appear as a Khatri section name.



The Muhammadan Sunárs.
443
Qub-caste of the Nag
It is
And numbers 1-5 of these will not 'intermarry 'with numbers 6-8,
(1. Batta
4. Malpani )
Sub-group ii, Arora 2. Suchcha 5. Battan Sof Uttaradhi status.
(3. Dhaneja
6. Bagti )
7. Chandpul )
8. Taramina of Dakhna status, also called Kirár.
9. Lodar )"
And numbers 1-6 of these will not intermarry' with numbers 7-9.
The Tánk sub-caste worships the snake as an emblem of the Nág or
Takshak, the founder of the Nág-bansi or Tánk-bansi family, and one
of their sections is called Nági. It is claimed that several of the
Bunjáhi sections also correspond to sections of the Bunjahi Khatris.
Snch are the Mittu, Vaid, Dhir, Mittu, Bholai or Bhalai, etc.
The Pajji section gives the following account of itself. When the
Rája of Lahore sent for warriors from Rájputána to oppose the
Moslems, Pajji, a Mair Rájput, came and when the war was over
settled at Pipanagari, now Pipnákh, a town which he and other Rájpats
founded. The other Rajputs turned Muhammadans and their descen-
dants the Chima and Chatta Játs are still found there. But Pajji's
remained Hindus and spread in all directious. Tenth in descent from
Pajji was Rai Budbo Mal, a charitable and wighty Rájput.
Rahin Mir puchhendya ra Jagat Budiho Pajji dá
Hathon deven ran chaşhen, enhin gullin vujji da
Banka chhail suhana tera gana bahin sujji da
Koi dharkon, koi parkon Rai Buitho da Pipnákha
Shah Sulemán vadiran laga din din vadhe dahaka.
“Bards ask in the way: verily, the world belongs to Budho Pajji:
You give charity (lit. give from your hand) and fight battles :
These are acts to win fame.
It is very beautiful, your bracelet of the right hand.
Some from here, others from there; but Rai Budho is of Pipnákha.
Sháb Sulaimán praises, and (your posterity) increases by tens."
The bracelet or gána, as it is called in the Punjab, was a mark of
liberality. Rai Budho is known to every child in Pipnakha. His
samadhi stands in the crematorium of Pipnákha to the exclusion of any
other gamádhi and at overy Diwali all the members of this family
illuminate his tomb.
The only territorial groups appear to be found in Hissár where the
Sunárs are divided into Desi (who can do fine work) and Bagri (who
cannot). But in Delhi we find two social groups, the Desi who practise
karewa and the Deswálá who avoid it, with territorial names. The
latter rank immediately below the Bánia.*
The Muhammadan Sunárs in Miánwáli have the following sections :-
Bahár, also found in Pesháwar.
Dhallá.
Dharna,t in Dera Ismail Khán also.
Gharwal, in Pesháwar also.
Jaurá.
Kakal.
* N. I. N. Q. I, 950.
+ The three sections found in Dera Ismail are all Aroſa gots also, and are said to havo
como from the Chenab valley in Jhang.



Sunar.Súr.
Katarwal, also found in Dera Ismail Khán.
Liláb, also in Peshawar.
Nghát, lgo in Dora Ismail Khán.
Ramzai.
Ríta, also in Peshawar.
Roda.
Shaikh.
The Mair gots have generally furnished converts to Islám, which the
Tánk have not done at least in large numbers : indeed in Lahore all the
Tánk gots (except Sammi) are said to be exclusively Hindu.
Among the Sunárs several occupational groups are found, but not-
withstanding that several branches of their handicraft have been highly
specialised none of these groups form sub-castes. Moreover, as so
often happens, the Sanárs by occupation dovetail into other castes.
Thus, to begin with the gold-washing industry, the washers in
Ambála are Kahárs and are termed Dhúlás,* and so too in Peshawar
it is dune by cis-Indus Kabirs (? Kabárs) and Niárias. The latter
do not appear to form a distinct caste.t In the south of the Deraját
they are called Sodhá, and are apparently the Sonis of Amnbála and
Sirmúr. The Niária derives his name from niára, 'separate, distinct,'
and is also a refiner and an extractor of the precious metals. Thus in
Dera Ismail Khán, Bobát and elsewhere the Niária extracts pure gold
from old ornaments by the tezáb process, described in North Indian
Notes and Queries II, § 167.
In the Simla Hills the Sunárs are a superior caste of goldsmiths.
They intermarry and eat with the Kanets, but not with the higher
castes.
Brahmans and Kanets will drink water touched by Sunárs and eat
apy food cooked by theli, except cooked rice and dál, but they will not
smoke from the same huqqa as a Sunár unless a kali be used in which
fresh water has been put. Neither Brahmaps nor Kanets can be out-
casted for cohabitiog with a Sunári.
SONARE, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Sunni The orthodox sect of the Muhammadans. The Sunnis are divided
into four great schools of doctrine, camely, the HANIPIAS, SHAFIAS,
MALAKIAS and HANBALIAS.
868. An Afghán tribe of the Lodi branch. The name means 'red. The
history of the tribe has already been given at pp. 272-3 supra. Accord.
ing to Ibbetson it was early in the 13th century, about the time of
Muhammad of Ghor, that the Prángi and Súr tribes settled in the
northern part of the tract immediately under the Sulaimáns, holding
Tánk and Rori, while the Sarwáni setiled in Drában and Chandwán.
The rise of the Lodi and Súr Sultáns of Delhi (1450-1565) brought
the Prangi and Súr into Hindustán, but they had formidable rivals in
their kinsmen, the Niázi, until Salim Shah Súri crushed the latter
* N. I. N. Q. I, 1165.
† Maclagan, p. 311, cf. p. 331.
Cf. N. I. N. Q., II, § 62.
Ś But the same account says that Sunárs do not intermarry with other castos,



Sura-Suthra-Sháhi.
445
tribe. They were, howover, unable to maintain their position at Tánk,
whence they were driven by the Loháni during Akbar's reign, many
being killed and the remnant finding a refuge in Hindustán, Sikandar
Shák Súr gave his name to the Sikandar Dhár in Mandi. Súr also =
Súr Dás, q. v. :
SURA, a Hindu and Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Mont-
gomery: a clan of Ját status found in Multán. They claim to have
come from Delhi in the time of Shah Jahan..
SURAJ PRASTA, & religious body found in the south of Dipálpur tahsil of
Montgomery whose only object of worship is the human body, the
worship, it is asserted, taking the form of promiscuous sexual inter.
course, gatherings of men and women collecting for this purpose. The
sect was founded by a Chuhrá Musalmán from Faridabad in Gugera
tahsil, who 18 buried at Khole Múríd, His widow, who lives at Somian, is
the higb priestess of the religion. Its adherents are chiefly Musalmáns.
SÁRDÁS, a blind bard who was a follower of Krishna. So, any blind Hindu or
Sikh, especially a blind man who has learned to sing sacred hymos, just
as háfiz is a blind Muhammadan who has learnt the Qurán by heart.
Panjati Dicty., p. 1082.
Suri, (1) a section of the Khatris. (2) An Afghán tribe=Súk.
SÚBWAT. A tribe of Játs who trace their descent from Pirthiraj and are
found in the 24 villages round Hodal in Gurgaon, taking wives from
other gots on equal terms, They appear to be the same as the Sarot.
Sussal, an A ráín clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
SUTBÁR, a group of the Lohár-Tarkhán caste. The Suthár Lohárs were
originally Hindu Tarkháns and have a tradition that Akbar took 12,000
of them from Jodhpur to Delhi, forcibly circumcised them, and compelled
them to work in iron, instead of wood. Some of the Lohárs admit this
story to be true. The Suthárs of Sirsa came thither from Sind, where
they say they formerly held land and they are commonly known as
Multáni Lohárs. Like the Ját Lohárs they rank above ihe Gádiya
group. The Hindu Suthárs are: Tarkháns, yet they are included in the
Dhawáns (q.r.) and are almost entirely agricultural, looking down upon
the artizan groups of the caste. They, too, say they came from Jodhpur
and still hold land in Bíkáner. Many of their clans are identical with
those of the Multáni Lohárs and though Hindus, they are certainly more
closely allied to them than to the Khâtis. In Sindbi suthár is the com-
mon term for a carpenter.
SOTRÁ Shání. An order of Sikh devotees whose origin is thus described :-
When Tegh Shah* fagér was alive, a boy was born of dark comples-
ion, (or with a black mark on his forehead) and moustache, and
who trace theial in Gurgaon same as t
al terms. und Hoda, descent fro
• Nothing about Tegh Sháh is known, but is said that he knew that it certain Aghun
Sháh would arise and successfully oppose the spread of Islám. He took care of the boy
when exposed by his parents, and at the age of 12 he went to Delhi, where he took the
name of Aghun Shah, and impressed his miraculous powers on Aurangzeb. That emperor
gave him a gold coin and à rupee but Aghun Sháb said he would not take them now but
to-morrow. By the morning tho emperor found the coins had turned into a rupee and a
pice. Hence the Suthrás exact & rupee at each wedding and a pice from each shop.
They recognised Gurú Nának as their teacher and assumed the title of Suthra : (Ambala
account).



446
The Suthra-Sháhis.
to where to Delu fagiratos), ora peror, moment of
with his teeth already cut*-and his parents exposed him, as a child so
born is unlucky. The tentht Gurú, Hargobindt, happened to find the
child and told his disciples to take him up but they refused, saying
that he was kuthrá, or dirty. The Garú replied he was suthrá or
clean and they then obeyed. This boy was the founder of the Suthra-
Shábí sect.
The Kángra version adds :-Twelve years later, in the reign of
Aurangzeb, the Hindus were persecuted and the emperor removed
every day it maunds of sacred threads (janeo8), erased the tilaks
from their foreheads, and compelled Hinda faqirs to show him miracles.
The Gurú then sent the boy Suthrá to Delhi to exhibit miracles to the
pmperor and to convert him to the right path. On reaching Delhi the
boy had a pair of sboes, lt háths long, made at a cost of 1 lakhs of
ropees. One night he put one of these shoes in the Delbi mosque,
together with a lota (the vessel used for washing the hands and feet
before prayer). Next morning the Muhammadans prostrated themselves
before the lota and shoe, considering them to be sacred, and tbeir
fame spread throughout the city. One day the boy tied the other shoe
to a stick and wended his way through the city, crying that he had been
robbed of the other shoe. News of this event reached Aurangzeb
who sent for the boy and asked him whether the shoe found in the
mosque was his. He said it was, whereupon the emperor said that, if
it was found not to fit him, he would be beheaded. The boy agreed and,
Calling on his Guru's name, put on the shoe which he found a little too
small. At this his face lit up, so that the emperor in amaze bude
him ask any boon he chose.
The boy warned Aurangzeb against farther persecution of the Hin.
dus, and the emperor assented. Moreover, he decreed that all his
subjects should at every wedding pay one gold mohar and 14 rupees
per shop to the boy, who refosed to accept more than 14 rupees at
each wedding and a pice from each shop. This decree was engraved
on a copper-plate. Then the boy want to Lahore and built himself a
house outside the Masti Gate. He made 4 chelas, Báwá Nihal Shah,ll
B. Guláb Sháh, B. Dídár Shah and B. Changar Shah. In the plains
the tax is still paid to the Suthra Sháhis, but in the hills it is not paid
in full owing to the poverty of the people.
The boy Suthra composed a búrá-másí in which the above history is
given. Another version adds various details, prefixed to the above
account. It makes the boy go to Delhi of his own accord, put on a boar's
* The boy is said to have been the son of one Nanda, a Khatri of Bahrampur, or Varyám.
pur Dinanagar in Amritsar.
* p The sixth Gurú was Gurú Hargovind, the tenth Govind Singh. The latter did not
regard the Suthrás favourably because they smoked (?) in excess, and were an encum-
brance to him in his attacks on the Mughal emperors.
It is also said that in Gurú Govind Singh's time Banda (Bairági) was the leader of the
Sutbrás. He aspired to be the eleventh durú, but as he shaved his head and face clean,
the Guru is said to have dubbed him suthrá (clean), although as his followers smoked ho
was kuthra (unclean) in the eyes of the Guru and his disciples, the Singhs.
I Guru Har Rai the sevanth Guru is said to have been the Guru in question, accord.
ing to the Kángra version, but in the Nábha Version Bába Nának is said to have ironi.
cally called the boy Suthra and to have conferred on him the powers of a Muhammadan
Bonawá, when the boy had grown up and gone to him. See telow also.
§ It would be interesting to know if this plate is still in existence.
|| How the title of Sheb came to be applied to the Hindu chelas is not explained.



The Suthrá Sect.
447
intestines as a janeo and apply a tilak of a shes* to his forehead. The
Qázi of Delhi orders this janeo to be broken, but in vain, so he licke it
away, and in consequence an evil smell issues from his mouth. The
Suthrá is thon arrested, but the emperor Aurangzeb keeps him near
the royal person and early next morning sees his face. As a result his
breakfast turns into loathsome insects and he orders the Sutbrá to exe-
cution. The latter demands to see the emperor and protests his inno-
cence, whereupon Aurangzeb declares that the sight of his unfortubate
face early that morning had deprived him of food all day. To this the
Suthrá forcibly rejoins that the sight of Aurangzeb's unlucky face :
had led to his being condemned to death. So the emperor set him free
and he took up his abode in a takiá behind the Jáma Masjid at Delhi.
He had the shoes 14 haths lung made and a lota of earth set with pre-
cious stones. Going one night to the mosque to recite his prayers he
Bed in the morning from the mosque out of fear of the Muhaınmadans
and left one shoe and tha lota behind him. When he came before the
emperor he found the shoe too small, but it just fitted Aurangzeb.
At the Suthra's instance the emperor closes his eyes and finds himself
alone with tbe Suthrá in a terrible place. The Suthrá mockingly
asks him where are now his troops, and why he persecutes the Hindu
faqirs. After craving his pardon Aurangzeb opens his eyes and finds
himself back in the Delhi fort.
The Suthrá Panth or Sect of the Suthras.
Both Hindus and Muhammadans enter this panth, whose members
are called Sutbrá Shán or Benawá.Mubaminadan Suthrás carry &
danda (staff) with which they strike their iron bracelets (churis).
Lindu Suthrás claim to be Udásis, are followers. of Gurú Nábak,t and
are said to have been founded by Hari Chand, his elder son. In theory
they are monotheists, but as they have to beg from Hindus they also
worship the Hindus' gods. Their gaddis in the larger towns have
deras attached to, and dependent on, them in the neighbouring villages.
They contain no idols, except the samádhs of deceased mahants, and to
those they offer dhúp dip. They chant the sabda of Guru Arjan.
The Suthrás are celibate, but make chelas. They wear a seli of
black 'wool round the deck, and carry black dandas, which they
icto be the larger the villages
* A still less savoury account is given in P. N. Q. I. $ 363 by Aya Singh.
+ It is not clear whether Muhammadans of this panth are alone called Shah, or whether
Hindus also use the title.
I According to Ibbetson the oruer was founded by a Brahman called sucha under the
auspices of Guru Har Rai. Le described them as numerous and widely distributed, notorious
for gambling, thieving, drunkenness, and debauchery, and leading a vagabond life, begging
and singing songs of a mystic nature. They wear ropes of black wool on the head and
neck, and beat two small black sticks together as they beg. Although a Sikh order, they
all return Themselves as Hindus, use the Hindu tilak or sectarian mark, and follow the
Hindu rites throughout. They were founded before the time of Guru Govind; which
probably accounts for their calling themselves Hindus. They generally add Sháb to their
names. Trumpp says of them “there is no order of regular discipline among them, and
profligates and vagabonds join them. They are a public nuisance and disavowed by
the Sikins." Bume Suthrá aphorisms will be found in P. N. Q. III, $ 669. They invoko
Bába Nának's name when begging from, or rather blackmailing, shop-keepers, saying :
May Bába Nának 8háh take your boat safely over the river (of life): ibid I, 8 612.
$ But in the Nábha version it is said that the boy after he had worshipped Durga for
12 years was by her given a small danda, black in colour. Hence the Suthrá still carries
two dandas, che a small one, in Durga's name, the other a large one in the Guru's namo.
buthrás also offer Durga karáhi in their deras during the Naurátras,



448
Swami-Swathi.
knock together, demanding a pice from each shop. If this demand
be refused they blacken their faces, burn their clotbes and expose
themselves naked in public, refusing to leave the shop until paid.
Mode of initiation. The candidate for admission into the panth is
dissuaded, but if he persists in his resolve to become a Suthrá, he is
warned that he will have to subsist by begging, remain celibate and
not quarrel, even if abused. His beard and moustache are then shaved
off by a barber, but his top knot is left to be cut off by his gurú, before
whom the candidate lays a razor and asks that he will shave off his top-
knot. The gurú repeatedly refuses to do so, returning the razor to him
several times, but finaliy the candidate's prayer is granted, his top-kpot
cut off and a mantra whispered in his ear by the 'gurú. The initiato's
olothes are given to the barber." Baráh is made and distributed among
those present. The initiate is invested with a xeli or necklet of black
wool, and a cotton janeo or sacred thread worn by a Brahman. The
two dandus are also given him and his initiation is complete. Suthras
must not wear anything but a dhoti, and cannot wear coloured dopattas
(shawls). Liquor and flesh are avoided but not tobacco. All castes are
now admitted into the order, though formerly, it is alleged, only Brah-
mans, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas were initiated.*
Rites at death.-All the Brahminical rites are observed at death, and
a Brahman is called in to perform the kiria karam, but it is said that
* Sikh is also called in to read the Granth. The sawaruí and
satárhrin rites of the Hindus are also performed, The body is
cremated and the ashes taken to the Ganges, but a small quantity
mixed with Ganges water and cow's urine is also placed in the dera
and a samadh built thereon.
Swami, an affix to the name of Sabiásis ; a spiritual preceptor, the bead of a
religious order: Panjabi Dicty., p. 1069. Cf. Shiámi.'.
SWANCH. Ját tribe found in the Báwal tahsil of Nábha. They claim descent
from Hari Singh, a Chauhan Rájput, who lost status by marrying a
wife of another tribe.
SWÁNGLÁ. A race confided to the Manchat tract of Lábul. In the langnage.
of Manchat (which is closely allied to the Munda languages) the generic
name for Láhul is Swánglá. 'The Swánglá mast not marry outside the
caste; they worship their own aboriginal goddess Hirma, and have a
hearty contempt for Lámas and Lamaism. They will, however, eat with
Kulu Kanets or Gaddis or any respectable Indian, but they loathe all
the otber inhabitants of Láhul whom they class generally as Bhot or
Tibetan. A Swánglá will however drink tea or lugri with a Bhot.
They are rapidly dying out. The progeny of a Swángla Bhot
marriage is called Garru and a Garru .will eat with a Bhot.
Swathi, (the h is due to contact with Hindki-speaking tribes), Pashtu Swátai.
A group of tribes claiming Pathán descent, but probably of heterogeneous.
origin." Originally inhabitants of the Swát valley the Swátbís invaded
* But in the Ambala account it is said that Obamérs, Chubras, Kabárs, Dhobis, Nais
and a few other castes cannot join the Suthras. On the other hand in Nibha it is said
that the boys of even well.to-do families who shirk hard work and desiro independence
join the order.



. The Swáthis.
449
Hazára during the 17th century and gradually overran Pakhli. Their
latest inroad was led by a Sayad, Jalál Bábá, whose tomb is in the
Bhogarmang valley. The Swátbi of Hazára are divided into two
branches, Ghabri or Utli (Upper) Pakhli, and Mamiáli-Mitrawi or Tarli
(Lower) Pakhli. The former hold the Kágán, Bálákot, Garbi Habibullah,
Mánsebra, Shinkiári, Bhogarmang and Konsh tracts, together with
Nandihár and Thakot in Independent Territory ; the latter ocoupy
the Bhairkund and Agror tracts, with Tikri and Daishi across the
border. They have a Khánkhel section to which their hereditary
chief belongs, but it claims Quraishi origin. Many of them are litigious
and untruthful, but they are intelligent and often fraux. Their poor
physique prevents their enlistment in the army. Swali deceit ,chal)
is a proverb.
The Mamiáli branch has 9 and the Mitráwi Gabri branch has 12
nimakais or shares divided among its clans and septs thus :-
(Kbánkheli, 1.
Khánkhol, I.
į Bilasuri, 1.
| Ali Sheri, 3 į Jabangiai, 1.
Sarkheli, 2.
Mitráwi, 6 ...
| Rajaura Ran.
(Dudal, 1.
1 sial, 1.
Mir, 3
Panjghol, 1.
Shamhori, 11.
( Panjmiral, 1.
Chuchai, 11.
Sharora, 1.
( Jahangiri, 1.
| Rabati, 1.
Deshrai, 3 ... } Arghorsbal Malkal, 1. Mamiáli, 6 ... { Panjkora Shulománi 1.
(Iznali Mandrai, 1.
Ashlor Malkai, J.
(Deshi, 1.



451
TAGA, a tribe fonnd only in the Jumna Khadir of Delhi and Karnál. They are
said to be Gang Brahmans by origin, and to have acquired their present
name because they 'abandoned' (tág dena*) priestly functions and
took to agricultura. Their origin is discussed at great length in Vol. I
of Elliott's Races of the North-West Provinces, pp. 106 to 115.; and
they are there identified with the Takkas, a possibly Scythian face
who had the snake for their totein, and whose destruction by Rája
Janamajáyat is supposed to be commemorated in the tradition of that
monarch's holocaust of serpents. The dificulty felt by Sir H. Elliott
in accounting for their tracing their origin to Hariána, is perhaps
explained by the fact that they give Safídon in Jind on the border of
Hariána, as tbe place where the holocaust took place; and the name
of the town is not improbably connected with sámp or snake. The
Tagas are probably the oldest inhabitants of the upper Jumna Khádir,
holding villages which have been untouched by changes in the course
of the stream for a far longer period than most of their neighbonrs !
The local tradition is that io Janamajáya's time there were no Gaurs
in this country, so he summoned many from beyond the sea! As balf
of them would not accept money for their services be gave them 184
villages, and so they resolved to take no offerings in future. They are
of superior social standing and strictly seclude their wonen, but are
bad cultivators, especially the Muhammadans. About three-fourths of
the total number have adopted Islám and ceased to wear the sacred
thread. The Hindus still wear it, but Brahmans do not intermarry
with them, or even eat ordinary bread from their hands and they employ
Brahmans to officiate for them in the usual manner. They are poor
agriculturists. They must be carefully distinguished from the Tågus
or criminal Brahmans of the same tract. Their clans or gois include
the Bachchas, Parasir, Bharadwaj, Gautam and Saroha. These clans
appear to have come each from a different tract, the Bachchas from
Kalwa Jamni in Jind, the Parasir from Pehowa, and the three last
named from Sirsa Patan' to the southward. Badhla appears to be an.
other of their sub-divisions.
TAGó, a criminal tribe, settled in Karnál, though its depredations are not
confined to that District. Its name has the same derivation as Tágá
and appears to be only a diminutive of that name. It is said that
its progenitor was & Brahman who married a Brahman widow, and
they are also known as Bháts. They have the same als as the
Brahmans. They are expert thieves, pickpockets and cheats, having,
it is said, a code of signals only understood by themselves and a secret
language, I which, however, appears to be used by other faqirs also.
• Another obscurely suggested derivation is from tarná, said to = janсhná, to divine.
+ Vulg. Jalmeja Rishi, also called Rájá Agrand.
1 A low specimens of this aro given below:
English.
Secret wor1.
English.
Secret word.
Radai.
Any ear ornament. Tappiar.
Rupoo.
Kania.
Silver.
Pathri.
Eight apna piece. Adhi Kania.
Gold.
Tík.
Gold Mobar.
Dhaular.
To wear.
Dhábná.
Baggage.
Khuchalli.
Sopoy.
Kutta.
Any nock ornament. Galtí.
Sub-Inspector. Ogáh.
Any arm
Dandoká.
An higher officer.
Bara Ogih.
Any nose
Besar.
Olothes.
Parangs.
Any logo
Tarlo dandoka. Il To gire bribes. Bedháná.
· Pice.



452
Tahim--Tájik.
They affect Sakhi Sarwar and silently vow to make offerings to
him if successful in theft. They still wear the sacred thread and
keep their women in strict seclusion. When detected in crime they
plead their Brahmanical sanctity.
Taním, a tribe, classed as Ját. They claim Arab origin, and to be
descended from an Ansári Quraish called Tamím. They formerly held
much property in the Chiniot of tahsil Jhang, and there were Tahim
governors of those parts under the Delhi emperors. It is said that the
Awáns have a Tahím clan. The Tahím are not wholly agriculturists
and are said not unfrequently to work as butchers and cotton scatchers ;
or it may be merely that tho butchers and cotton scatchers have
a Tahím clan called after the tribe. They are almost confined to
Bahawalpur and the lower Indus and Chonáb in Multán, Muzaffar-
garh, and Dora Ghazi Khán, The Multán Tahím say that their more
immediate ancestor Sámbhal Shah came to that place some 700 years
ago on a marauding expedition, and ruled at Multán for 40 years,
after which he was killed and his followers scattered. In his invasion
of India duting the latter part of the 14th century, Taimur encountered
his old foes 'the Getre (Játs), who inhabited the plains of Tahím,'
and pursued them into the desert; and Tod: mentions an extinct
Rajput tribe which he calls Dahíma.* Local tradition at Chiniot in
Jhang asserts that Sa'adulla Khán, minister of Shah Jahán, was a
Tahím Ját of that place and one of its suburbs is called Gaſhi
Tahímán.t
In Bahawalpur they are onltivators bat still mindful of the fact that
Sa'adulla Khan, winister of the emperor Shah Jahán, and Shaikh
Jalál, a learned man of Agra in the time of Humáyúo belonged to
their tribe, is now found mainly in the Chenab in the south-west of the
Kubírwala tahsil of Multán, where they have a bad name for crime,
but they are also found in other parts of the District, especially
between Lodhrán and Kahror..
Tahir, a sacred clac, found in Montgomery.
Tagráná, one of the two principal branches of the Syáls in Montgomery.
Tajár, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán..
T'AJIK.-The original inhabitants of Persia, the present raling race being
Turk. They are possibly represented in India by the Dilazák clan of
the Pathans, but Bellew declares that the Dilazák are not Tájik at
all: and he says that now-a-days the term is used loosely to include all
Persian-speaking people of Afghánistán who are not either Hazárá,
Afghán, or Sayad. The Tájik proper extends from Herát to the
Khyber and from Kandahar to the Osus and even into Kashgar (all
the plain country of Afghánistán) and the term is also applied to the
descendants of Persian inhabitants of Badakshán. Poaceable, in-
dustrious, faithful and intelligent: in villages cultivators:in towns artisans
and traders : almost all secretaries, clerks, and overseers are Tájik,
They are either Shia or Sunni. They are also said to be the Persian
* See Vol. II, p. 220. The Dahima Brahmans have a family goddess, Sri Dadbirati
Mátáji-whence their name-whose temple is near Manglod, & village in the Nágaur
district of the Jodhpur State. According to Tod the Dahíma was a royal race, and the
PONDIR are an offshoot of it. Possibly Tahim is a corruption of Dahlma...
+ P. N. Q. I.. $ 809 and II, $ 180,



The Tájéks.
458
population of Bokhára and thereabouts, overborne by the invasion
of Tartars, such as Uzbegs, etc. But, acoording to Mr. Longworth
Dames,* the name Tájík (or Tázhík) is generally used not only in
Afghánistán but in the neighbouring parts of Persia and Turkistán
to denoto the settled Iranian population, which is probably the earliest
established of all the races now inhabiting the country. Some bave
supposed the name to represent the Dadikai of Herodotus, and even
the Paskai of Ptolemy has been thought to be the same word, the
initial being properly T instead of P. These guesses do not require
serious consideration. The word Tájík as now used properly means
Arab, and it was applied to those communities where Arabs settled at
the time of the first Arab conquest. It was soon applied to all tho
settled communities, and the traces of Arab blood now remaining are
but slight. The Tájíks are almost entirely a settled agricultural com-
munity, and doubtless occupied all the more fertile parts of the country
before the Afgháos spread from the eastern mountains. They are
organized as a rule in village communities and not on the tribal system.
They also supply the bulk of the trading classes and artisans of the
towns. The trading instincts of certain sections of the Ghalzais may
perhaps be attributed to their partly Tájik blood. Wherever the
Afgháns are in possession the Tájiks are tenants or dependants,
although they often own the land. Where they have villages of their
own they are presided over by their own headmen or kad.khudás,
Although Persian in race and language they agree in religion with the
Afgháns and are devout Sunnites. The tribe system maintains itself
among certain independent branches of the race which exist in moun-
tain tractis. Such are the Kohistanis of the Kábul province, the
Khinjápis, the Barbakís of Logbar and Butkhák, and the Farmúlis
who occupy the country west of Kábul. The population of Kábul itself
is mainly Tajik and the language Persian. The people of Sístán are
also mainly of this stock mixed with Baloch, and the traditions pre-
served in the Shah-nama point to this locality as one of the earliest
Iranian centres. A few Kayání families which claim to be descendants
of the ancient Kayání or Achæinenian kings are still wound in Sistán.
The province of Zarañka or Drangiána, afterwards Sakasténé, Sijistán,
Sistán, included the lower basin of the Helmand River, perhaps as far
as Zạmíndáwar, and it was here and in the adjoining mountains of
Gbor that the powerful Tajik kingdom of the Ghoris arose in the
5th and 6th centuries of the Hijra, which overthrew the decaying
Ghaznawí monarchy and supplied conquerors to Northern India.
Tájiks formed an important element in all armies, and the desperate
resistance which the Ghori mountaineers offered to the Mongols is
evidence of the warlike qualities. The Kurt dynasty which ruled
Afghánistán under the Persian Mongols were also Tájiks.
In the south spreading into Balochistán the population of Tajik
origin goes by the name of Dehwár or Dehkán, 2. e. villager, and
north of the Hindú-kush as in Turkistán generally they are known
as Sarts.
The Pashai race which occupies the skirts of the mountains north of
the Kábul River in the Jalálábád province may perhaps be classed as
* In Encyclopedia of Islam.



454
Tajrá
Tamboli,
Tajik, although they speak a uon-Iranian language akin to that of the
adjoining Siyáh-posh Káfirs, The Urmarís of Loghar and Káníguram
in the Mahsúd Wazir country, who speak an Iranian dialect called
Bargastá, must also be placed among the Tájíks.
The Ghalcha races of Wakhán and Badakhshan, which occupy the
northern slopes of the Hindú-kueh, and speak Iranian languages
differing from Persian, are generally classed as belonging to the
Highland Tajík type, which has kept apart from the lowland Tajiks of
Badakhsháu who speak Persian. They are a broadheaded race and
are considered by Ujfalvy and others to belong to the Alpine race.
They are found in Sarikol, Wakhán, Shignán, Munjan, Sanglích and
Ishkashim, and comprise also the Yidgáh on the south side of the
mountains. The name Ghalcha applied to the group simply inoans in
Persian "peasant."
Tajrá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Maltán.
Tajrái, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
T'AJWÁNAR, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
TAK SEROA, a tribe of Jaţs found in Delhi.
Takhti, see under Utmánzai.
TAKHTIKHEL, see under Marwat.
TAKROL, 8 sept of Brahmans, hereditary pujáris of Keonghal. They derive
their name from the village of Țakren.
Talaa, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
TáL-BUR, lit. 'wood-cutter' in Balochi, also the name of a Baloch tribo.
Cf, Tálpur.
TALERí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Moltán.
TALOKAR, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Talof, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Moltán.
TALPUR, Tálbur, the well-known tribe to which the Amírs of Sindh belonged
and usually identified with the Tálbur clan of the Leghári BALOCH, but
by some derived froın Balo's gon Talbur and hence supposed to be of
Buledhi origin.
TAMBOLÍ, fem. -AN, a seller of betel-nut. Panjabi Dicty., p. 1099. Taboli,
Tamoli or Tanoli, from Sanskrit tambrili, a betel-seller begotten
by a Vaisya on a Sudra (Colebrooke, Essays, p. 279).--A Tamboli in a
man who sells pán and betel-nut; but whether the sale of those com.
modities is confined to a real caste of that name it is difficult to say:
probably the term is only occupational. If Tamboli were a real
caste we should have it returned at a Census from every district,
as the word seems to be in use throughout these Provinces. Sherring,
however, gives it as a separate caste in the neighbourhood of Benåres.
According to one writer the Tambolis or Panwaris- sellers of botel.
nut'-are not of any particular caste, bat & caste origin has been found



Tanaoli, Tarur.
; 456
for them and they are said to be by descent Brahmans who took to
drinking water out of leather-bags and so were out-casted by orthodox
Brahmans.*
TANAOLI, TANOLI, TANOL, TOL, TAOLI, TAHOLA, TARNOLI.-A tribe in Hazara
described at p. 256 supra.
Tanpi, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
TáŅgrá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán, and settled there from
the time of Akbar.
TANWAR, & tribe of Játs found in Gurgaon. Cf. 'Tanor.
TÁNWARí, a Ját clao (agricultaral) found in Multán.
Taoni, a tribe of Játs of Bhatti origin and descendants of Raja Salvában,
whose grandson Rai Tán is their eponymous ancestor. One of his
descendants, Rai Amba, is said to have built Ambála. They occupy
the low hills and sub-montane in the north of Ambála district includ-
ing the Kalsia State, and some of the adjoining Pațiála territory.
They are said to have occupied their present abode for 1,800 years.
The Bachal Játs are said to be descendants of a Taoni by a Ját wife.
TANOR, a tribe of Játs claiming Rájput origin and a connection with Rájá
Angial (? Anangpál) of Delhi, but now intermarrying with Játs.
Found in Sialkot. Doubtless - Tunwar.
TAPPI, seo under Wazír.
Tárá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
TARAKKI, a tribe of Afghán pawindas, largely nomad. They winter about
Kandahár.
TARAKZAI, a clan of the upper or Bár Mohmadds, settled in the Duába tappa
of Pesháwar. It originally held the Khálsá tract in that District, but
in Jahangir's reign it settled in the hills above the present Michui
Fort. It received two villages as blood-money from the Daúdzáis
and these represent its daftar and belong to the tribe. lo Ahmad
Sbáh's reign ono Zain Khan was recognised as its khán or chief and
founded the Murchakhel section, Their land is minutely sub-divided
and they are much addicted to gambling.
TARÁNA, & Mubammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery
TARAGAß, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
TARAP, gee Cháh-zang.
TARAR, a Ját tribe which often claims Rájput status, especially in Gujráuwála
and Shahpur. It claims Solar Rájput origin, apparently from the
Bhatti of Bhatner. They say that their ancestor Tárar took service
with Mahmúd Ghaznavi and returned with him to Ghazni; but that his
son Lohi, from whom they are descended, moved from Bhatner to
Gujrát whence the tribe spread. Another story dates their settlement
* P. N. Q. III, & 724.-P. Hari Kishen Kaul alludes to the Tamoli Agarwals as a group
of that casto (Bánia) wbo adoptou the work of Kunjras and had to bo contont with a low
place in the caste gradation.



456
Tareli- Tarin.
from the time of Hamayún. They intermarry with Gondal, Varaich,
Gil, Virk, and other leading Ját tribes of the neighbourhood ; and they
have lately begun to intermarry within the tribe. Some of them are
still Hindus. They hold land on both sides of the Upper Chenab,
about the junction and within the boundaries of the Districts of Gujrát,
Gujránwála, and Shahpur. They are described as “invariably lazy,
idle, and troublesome.”
Lowo
.. .
· The account current in Gujranwála adds that their ancestor was
Tartar, whose great-grandson Banni came from Bhatner (in the Patiala
territory), with his sons, and settled in Gujrát. One of his song
Amrah, however, recrossed the Chenab, and founded the village of
Amrah, and his descendants have now forined a colony of 62 villages
in this district. The 7 sub-divisions of the tribe are named after the
sons of Banni. They intermarry with all Muhammadan Játs, but are
much addicted to marriages of cloşe affinity within their own clan.
The custom of pagri.vand prevails. Adoption is not usually recognized
among them, nor can an adopted son inherit ancestral property,
although in a few instances this rule has been broken. Sultan Mahmúd, -
son of Izzat Bakhsh, a famous chief of the tribe at the close of the
Mughal era, was a robber, who was slain by the chiefs of the Kharral
in Jhang about 1770. The Gujrát account makes the Tárar descendants
of Kájá Karo. Lohi's descendant Bhatti had pine sons, Dhirak,
Shahna, Amra, Uppal, Buta, Lakhanpál, Atra, Sálmani and Gondra
Bhalli and they came to Gujrát.
TARELÍ, a Ját clau (agricultural) found in Multán,
MARER, & tribe, apparently almost extinot, which held Bágh, & village whose
rúins are said to be still traceable near Sakesar Hill. The legend of
its dispersion is given in Vol. I. The Tarer are possibly the Trerh of
Rawalpindi, P. N. Q. I, § 697.
TARAIND or TARHAND : see Trund.
Tarholí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
rapina Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar and Montgomery.
According to Raverty Tarin was a son of Sarabarn, so the Taríns are
connected with the Gadúns. According to their own account Tarín had
three song, Abdal Khán, Tor (Black) Khán and Spín (White) Khán.
From the first are descended the Saddozais and Durranis : from the
second and third the Tarins themselves. The Tor Taríns lie in the
Haripur plain ; and there are a few. Spín Tarín in Tarbela, but the
rest are said to be in Peshin. Another section is the Malkiár-also
found in the Haripur plain. The l'or Tarín themselves say that they
belong to some subsidiary branch, descended from a brother of Tor
and Spín Khán. They appear to have come to Hazára at the invitation
of the Gujars whom they gradually supplanted. Sher Khán, the first
to settle in Hazára, was driven out of Kandahár by its governor and
about 1631 took service with Shah Jahan who gave him a jágír,
perhaps in Hazára, on feudal · terms. The Tarın soon rose to be tho
most important tribe in Lower Habára, but with the advent of
the Sikhs their power Waned.* Some Tarín are also found in
* For details of their later history see the Hazára Gasetteer, 1907, p. 22.



Tarkanri-Tarkhan.
457
Pesháwar. In Multán there are a few Taría families, but none of any
great mark.
TÄRKANRÍ, TARKILANRÍ, a Pathán tribe akin to the Yúsafzai whicn overran
Bajaur about the end of the 16th century and now holds its valleys
As below: the Chaharmung and Babukara valleys (by the Salarzai
sept), the Watalai (by the Mamund sept, which also holds a large
tract in Shortan, Hindúraj and Marawara on the northern slopes of
the watershed between Bajaur and the Kunar valley), the Baraul
and Jandol valleys (by the Isázai), and the Maidán (by the
Ismailzai).
The Tarkanrí used to own allegiance to a ruling family, of which
Saider Khăn, the Khán of Nawagai, is the lineal descendant.
TÁRKASII, a wire-drawer : cf. Katáya.
TARKHÁN, TARKHÁNR, Taxuán, TharkánR, DARKHÁN, a carpenter, syn. Sari
Kárigar, in Peshawar; Barháí, Barí or Bádí, Najjár, Ghárú, Khátí
(Klatí), Kárchob, Kharádí, Mistrí (or Mishtrí), Arakash, Chatrera (or
painter), Kárígar, and Rámgarhia ; Chattarsáz or umbrella-maker;
Kamángar or lacquerer; and SoThár.
The Tarkhan, better known as Barhái in the Hills, Bárhi in the
Jumna districts and Kháti in the rest of the Eastern Plains,* is the
carpenter of these Provinces. Like the Lohár he is a true village
menial, mending all agricultural implements and household furniture,
and making them all, except the cart, the Persian wheel, and the angar-
press, without payment beyond his customary dues. He is in all
probability of the same caste as the Lohár: but his social pusition is
distinctly superior. Till lately Játs and the, like would smoke with
hiin, though latterly they have begun to discontinue the custom. The
Kháti of the Central Provinces is both a carpenter and blacksmith,
and is considered superior in status to the Lohár who is the latter only.
The Tarkhán is very generally distributed over the Province, though,
like most occupational castes, he is loss nomerous on the lower frontier
than elsewhere. In the hills too his place is largely taken by the
TAÁVI, and perhaps also by the Lohár. In the Jumia districts the
Bárki is said to consider himself superior to his western brother the
Kháti, and will not intermarry with him ; and that the married women
of the latter do not wear nose-rings, while those of the former do. The
Ráj or bricklayer is said to be very generally a Tarkhan.
Occupational groups.
The Tarkháns include a number of occupational groups which do not
appear to form sub-castes. Such are the Ara-kash or sawyers, the
Kangi-gharas or comb-makers, in Sialkot: the Kharadís or turners
and, the Ráj or masons: and the itinerant Lohárs who comprise the
Saiqalgirs or grinders, and the Gadia (Gádhia) or cartmen.
Social groups.
The Tarkháns are divided into a number of social groups, which are
as a rule ill-defined and which appear to vary in different parts of the
* Aliunde in Hariána the worker in wood is called a Khati, in the south a Sutár, in the
Jumpa valley & Brabai, and in the Punjab a Tarkbán.



458
The Tarkhán groups.
Province. Thus in Gurgaon the Khátis are said to be divided into
9 khânps, each forming an endogamous sub-caste. Thege are
i. Dhamán.* | iv. Kukas.t
1 vii. Sútár, Bisotá or Bisútrá.
ii. Gaur.
v. Matharia. I
viii. Tánk.
iii. Jángra.
| vi, Ojhá.
T iæ. Tarkhán.
Of these 9 only 3, the Gaur, Jángļá and Sútár are found in that
District. The two former each comprise 1,444 sásans or sections
equivalent to the gots of other Punjab castes-while the Sútár alone
has 120 gots, whence its name of Bisútá or Bisótá,= 120. These sub-
castes may, indeed, eat and smoke** together, but their customs like
their origins vary.
The Jángļás claim descent from Jaipu Rishi, a descendant of
Viswakarma, but their gotra is Angra, after the name of a famous
Rishi. In Gurgaon the Jángrás predominate. .
There is a curious divergence of custom in the Khátí caste regarding
the wearing of the náth or nose-ring by married women. In ancient
times it used to be worn, but when karewa was introduced its use
was discontinued. At the building of the Jama Masjid at Delhi,
however, the Khátí women found the náth still worn by their Jaipur
sisters and asked to be allowed to resurne it. The Khátí kanchayat
however decided that they must choose either nátá; 1.6. widow-marriage
or the nose-ring (náth), and the women unanimously chose the former.
This panchayat was held at Delhi, but, as it differed on so important
a maiter, Goháná in Rohtak has since been the principal chauntra
or seat of the panchúyat of the Járgrá Khátís.
The Gaur allege a descent from Ginga Rishi, and claim to be a
Brahman barn. As a rule their married women wear the náth but in
the sásans which practise karewa its use is not allowable. Hence the
khánp is split up into two sub-castes, one allowing, the other prohibit-
ing, widow-marriage; and, as a body, the khánp avoids eating or smok.
ing with the other khánps.
The Sútár both allow karewa and their married women wear the
náth Karewa is, however, only allowed on certain conditions ; (i) an
unmarried man cannot contract it under pain of excommunication ;
and (ii) it can only be contracted with the widow of a younger
brother, the widow of an elder brother being regarded as a mother.tf
In Rohtak the Khátís are divided into 5 groups :-
Sutár,
| Tirwa,
Jángrá,
Dhamán,
Tánk,
of which the latter is mainly found in the District. Here it claims to
be of Maithal Brahman descent and derives its name from yag, or
jangrá, one of their numerous beds. Prior to Aurangzeb's reiga
their women worn nose-rings, but for some unknowo reason their use
o ever, only allowder pain of low of a younger
* Dhamman are found in the Agra and Mathura districts of the United Provinces.
+ Kukás, Kokash, in the north of India..
| Mathariá, in Mathura, Agra and Morádábád.
$ Ojhá, descended from Ojha, a Rishi, and found in Mathura and Agra.
il Tånk, in Delhi, Mathura and Agra.
| Tarkhán, in the Punjab.
** But in some cases the stem of the pipe is not used.
it This is expressly stated not to be the case in the other khánps, which allow marriage
with an elder brother's widow. The Wardi got of Mansur Dewa in Ferozepur avoid four
gots in marriage.



The Tarkhán groups.
459
was discontinued. Another tradition is that 500 or 700 years ago a
Jángśá panchayat gave the women their choice between white clothes,*
with a nose-ring, or red ones without it. They chose the latter and
since then have worn no nose-ring.
The Tarkhans are confined to the Punjab proper and in their case
the caste is divided into four main groups :-
1. Dhaman, descended from Balás.
2. Khátí, „ , Charas.
3. Tirwa, Tirwár, Tirí, descended from Parag. $ The four sons of Lochan, a descendant
4. Tángó or Deóra, Khairchịa or Ghasítwa, des. 1 of Viswakarma.
cended from Bokar.
The traditions given to explain the names of these four sub-castes
vary in detail, but agree in the main : Locban's sons went a-hunting,
and by accident Parag killed a cow with his arrow (tir, whence Tirwa
etc.). Charas dug a pit (khata) in which to bury the carcase' ; Bokar
dragged it to the pit, and his descendants are kuown as Khainchșa,
while the fourth son covered the carcase with earth, whence Dbaman.
To these some accounts add a fifth barn, the Tánk, descended from
the brother who endeavoured to sew (tánknâ) t up the cow's wound.
This account explains Dhaman as traditionally derived from dhampana,
'to make a poise' because the eldest brother reported to the king, bis
father, what his four brothers had done and broke off all intercourse
with them. Other accounts omit the Kbainchrá, but reiaip the Tánk,
thus making the number of barns four. The four barns are in either
case said to form endogamous sub-castes and even to forbid eating and
smoking together.
Of these four barns the Dhamán and Kháti only are found, at least
in any numbers, in the Punjab proper and the Dbamáns look down upon
the Khátís as their inferiors. The latter are said to have a curious
custom : at a wedding a cow's image is made of kneaded flour and
arrows shot through it. Sweetened water is then poored over it and
some given to the bridegroom to drink. In the rest is boiled rice
with some sugar and a second image of a cow is made of the rice.
This, too, is pierced witb an arrow and chen distributed among those
of the brotherhood who are present.
As the mythical founder or progenitor of the caste, Viswakarma
is invoked early in the morning as well as before commencing work. :
The Dhamáns in general, and especially those of the Rupál got,
visit a sidh's shrine at Rakbara, near Nábha. This sidh was a
Rupal larkhan who was persecuted by his step other. She gave
him to eat only cow-duog cakes covered with pa e and even ihese he
gave to a faithful black dog. But one day, undule to endure hunger
any longer, the boy made a heap of the cow-dung cakes and burnt
himself alive on them. Goats are commonly offered at the shrine, the
animal (a black dog) destined for sacrifice being carefully washed and
* In sign of widowhood.
+ Tánká, P., a stitch, weld.
One account, from Amritsar, makes Tangu, meaning dragger,' the third barn. If this
could be accepted Tángu, Khainchța and, Ghasítwa would be synonyms.
West of the Bias, in Amritsar, are found two hypergamous groups, the Uchándi or Upper
and the Newándi or Lower. The latter are looked down upon because they make an image
of a cow out of wheat flour at weddings, and break it up with an arrow. Thus the Newándi
group would appear to correspond roughly with the Khátis, and the Uchándis with the
Dhaman described above.



460
Tarkheli-Tátor.
decked with a wreath. It is then let loose in front of the shrine and, if
it go straight into it, is believed to be accepted by the sidh and killed ;
otherwise, it is supposed not to be acceptable.
The Hindu Tarkhán appear to have no territorial groups.
Khátís are descended from Nal and Nil, two sons of Viswakarma.
TARBEELI, one of the three sub-sections of the Allazai Utmánzai Pathans, seto
tled in the Khari tract and the lower end of the Gandgar range in Bazára
with several villages in the Attock tahsil. They do not intermarry with
the rest of the Utmánzai and their customs also differ. Inheritance
is per capita, not by the chúndawand rule. :The Tarkheli in
character is inferior, being idle, dissolute and formerly given to violent
crime, though they are now settling down. The name is a corruption of
Tahir Khel.
TÁRÚ, a swimmer; metaphorically a saviour. Cf. Malláh.
Tat Khálsa, the pure' Khálsa, or those of the elect among the
Sikhs who adhere to the doctrines of Gurú Govind Singh. The term
dates back to the time of Bábá Bandá, a trusted disciple of that Gurú,
who, after his death proclaimed himself as the eleventh Gurú. Those
who accepted his claims came to be known Bandái-Khálsa but others
who adhered to the command of Guru Gobind Singh that the Granth
was thereafter to be their Gurú gave themselves the name of Tat
(pure) Khalsa. With the fall of Bandá Babádur, his following gradu.
ally melted away and the term Tat Khálsa also fell into disuse. It has
been revived recently, by the class kaown as the Neo.Sikh party (a
term disliked by the Sikhs of that class) who are whülly and solely
devoted to the tenets of the 10 Gurús and do not like their religion to be
corrupted by association with any non-Sikh belief. They are trying to
restore the faith to what they consider its pristine purity. The
term Tat Khálsa appears to have been taken up by the Hindus who
are opposed to the separatist movement of the Sikhs as a nickname and
is now resented by the followers of this new reform movement. The
members of this group disregard caste and restrictions on eating and
drinking, and aim at establishing a universal brotherhood amongst the
Sikhs, with views, liberal in some respects and orthodox in others,
based mainly upon convenience. The movement is more or less roac:
tionary and although averse to fanaticism it enjoins a very strong
esprit de corps. The chief centre of the movement is Amritsar. Khalsa
meads'tbe pick' and implies the true followers of Guru Gobind Singh.
The term is applied generally to all Kesdháris, but has recently acquired
a special significance similar to that of Tat Khálsą. Punjab Census Rep.,
1912, $ 220.
TATERA, see Thathera.
TATLA, a Ját clan (agricultural), found in Amritsar.
T u a tribe of Játs found in Sialkot. Claim descent from Tatls, one of
the 22 song of Sanpál, the Hajoah Rájput. In the time of Firoz Shah
they settled in pargana Nárowal of Sialkot,
Timor a small Pathán tribe, one of the four branches of the Loháni. Roughly
bandled by Nadir Shah, the Daulat Khel completed their ruin and
they are now almost extinct. Their cland, the Bara and Dari Khele,
hold a small area on the Tánk and Kuláchi border. -



Tátra-Teli.
461
TATBI, an agricultural clan, found in Shahpur.
TATTAR, a carrier or pedlar (= PARÁCBA) in Peshá var.
TaUDI KÁRIGAR, ironsmith (= Lohár) in Pesbáwar.
Taur, & Rajput clan (agricultural), found in Amritsar. Cf. Túnwar.
Táwá, a man-servant kept in & Spiti monastery to light tre, etc., also
called togochi.
TAWBI, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural), found in Montgoinery.
Tura, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
TELI, an oilman; on the Indus, in Miáowáli,* in Muzaffargarh and Dera
Gbázi Khán called Cháki or Chágí; sometimes magpiloqnently styled
Roghangar or Roghankash. Ofton employed as a soap-maker (sábún.
gar) or felt worker (namdaráz). Pálí in most cases must stand for a
cowherd, though it is often synonymous with Teli.
Occupation. The substitution of kerosine oil for indigenous vegetable
oils, even in the poorest bouses, has deprived the Telis of their original
occupation and driven them to seek & livelihood in several other
callings. In Gurdáspur, for iustance, many, if not most, are now tenants
of land.
Occupational groups. The Telis may be said to comprise at least throo
main groups :--
1. The Kharásia or millers.*
II. The Penja or Dhunia, who are cotton-cleaners.
III. The Telis proper, called Janglat in Siálkoç, who are telis or
oil-pressors by occupation..
The Dhunias are sometimes also sellers of meat. The Qasáis form
& separate group.
Other minor groups are the Ladnias, or carriers, in Amritsar,
Hosbiárpur, Gurdaspur, and Sialkot: the Malaks or camel-drivers, in
the same Districts; the Dárugars or powder-makers in Sjálkot; the
Namdgars, makers of coarse woollen rugs, in Shahpur: and a group of
Soap-manufacturers, in Miánwálí.
Territorial groups.--In Pațiála the Telís are said to comprise tbree
territorial groups : Lahorí, Sirhindi and Bágļí : while in Jind there are
said to be four: Desí, Bágrí, Multání and Nagauri.
Social groups.--In Pațiála and Amritsar, at least, the Telfs bave u
Barhi or 12 group and a Budjáhi or 52-group, but their precise com.
position is not at all clear. In Pațiála the Bárhis are said to be Penjas,
as well as telis by occupation : while the Bunjáhis are Kharásias and
telis but not Penjas. On the other hand in Amritsar, it is said, the
Bárhis are only Kbarásias; the Bunjáhis being true telis.
In the Bhawánigarh tahsil of Pațiála there are two endogamous
groups: (i) those who make a bride wear the paihan or gown, like that
of the Kumhárs, and (ii) those who make her wear tho ghagra or
petricoat in lieu of the paihan.
Territorial gresLahorí, Sirhindani and Nagauri. the Telfs bave
* said to be also called Dogra Telís in Sialkot.
+ 1.6. of the plains,' to distinguish them from the Dogra Telis.



462
The Telis.
In Hoshiarpur we find yet another group, the Chaukara, 80-called
because its members spend four times as much at funerals and wed-
dings as other members of the caste. In this group are comprised four
sections, the Jhangio, Bhasin, Balun and Jindan göte.
MUHAMMADAN Telis.
Origin.-The Muhammadan Telis claim descent from Bábá Hassú,*
who invented the kolhu or oil-press and whose shrines are at the Chauk
Jhanda at Lahore and at Siálkot.
Tradition says that Luqmán, son of Bá’úr and nephew of Hazrat Ayub,
was apprenticed to Hazrat Dáúd, the inventor of all arts. Luqmán
had often tried to extract oil from oil-seeds, but without success, until
an old woman suggested mixing water with the oil-press (gháni).
Another story is that once Luqmán when travelling in the desert was
caught in the rain, and put his clothes under an inverted jar. When
the shower had passed he entered a hut where he found the devil, who
taught him how to make oil in return for an explanation as to how
Luqmán had kept his clothes dry.t
After Luqmán came Bábá Budhú,f and after him Míná and Bábá
Jassú, who worked oil-presses. But according to another account,
after Luqman came Bábá Hassú. He had a son called Míná, who
also took to cleaning clothes. Bábá Míná was indeed the founder of
the Bunjáhis or true Telís. He in turn had four sons, Takht, Bakht,
Rakht and Sakht.
Other accounts represent Bábá Hassú as merely the patron saint of
the Telís, and as a Sayyid by race. The guardians of his shrine used
to be invited by the Telís to their funerals and festivities and suitably
fed, but this practice has now ceased.
In Dera Gbázi Khán a Telí begins his work with an invocation to
Luquán. With Luqmán Bábá Hassú is invoked when oil-seeds are put
into the press in the following prayer :-
Pir ustad Lugman hakim hikmat dá bádsháh. Dáda Hassii Teli
khush wasse haweli : i. e. “Luqman our master, is the prince of (all) arts.
May Dáda Bassú Teli live happily in his dwelling."
In Gurdaspur the norniny prayer, said while reverently touching the
kolhu, reads:-Bismillah-ur-Rahmán, ur-Rahim, yú pir Hassú ; to which
is sometimes added tera Alláh hi Alláh hai, “God is with thee !!!
This does not apply to the eastern Districts where the Telis know nothing of Bébé
Hassá or his story. In Shahpur the Tahím section, who appear to be Namdgars by trade,
alone claim descent from Bábá Hassú.
+ A variant of this legend says that Plato had a well in his garden whence a girl came
to draw water. She kept her clothes dry by the same device and the philosopher was so
puzzled that, in return for her explanation as to how she had kept her clothes dry, he
taught her to make oil by crushing mustard seed.
I Gurú Budhú is also worshipped by the Telís of Bapúr in Patiala. They distribute
sweet puras or sweetmeats, which are made of 13 sers of flour, among children in his name.
When yoking a new ox to the kolhu they also make gulgulas and place them in it, invoking
Budhi's naine, but that is all they know about him. Budhu may be a name for Bhairon. .
§ He is said to have kept an oil shop and to have always asked a customer to weigh out
his own oil. If the customer weighed it incorrectly he was smitten with blindness. Another
account says he was a kháti or digger of grain pits. ¡Panjábi Dy. p. 592 khátí ='digging')



The Teli groups.
463
Guild system. The Telís of Jind tahsil have a chauntra at Jind
town and subordinate to it are tappas at several of the larger villages in
the tract. The sirpanch is hereditary, and one or two headmen from
oach tappa assemble at the chauntra.
The sirpanch receives a pagri at a birth, wedding or funeral, and
exercises the usual functions. Elsewhere the caste has a system,
rather more nebulous than usual, of panchayats, sometimes without
chaudhris. In Ambála the Penjas and Telís bave separate panchayats.
The following is a list of the Teli gots, wbich are said to bumber 53
in Gurgaon, or 64 (12 Bárhi and 52 Bunjabi) elsewhere. The list,
however, includes many als or septs :-
Ádí.
? Gharia.
Kháng ú.
Púnhar, Punwar.
Alamí.
Gil.
Kbarmshi.
Puráná.
Alí.
Gori, Goria.
Kharse.
Puriwál.
Aman, Amán.
? Gúndra.
Khatrí.
Quraishi.
? Arbia.
Guzára.
Khetle.T
Ragú.
Arlí.
Hammí.
Khokhar.
Ráhtar.
Baddhar.
Hastra.
Kichchí.
Rajpál.
Baddá.
Hindru.
Kikkar.
Ráthor.
Badgujjar.
Hír.
Ladhu Khel. ? Rehr.
Bágļi.
Jadhrán.
Langhe.
Royá.
Bahlím, Balim, Báhlím. Jaggi.
Láře.
Rurá.
Basin, Bhasin
Jaid.
Lohar.
Sábal.
Batham.
Jajuhan.
? Lund-datra. Saihna, Sahni,
Bhand. *
Jandán.
Magh Hans. Sainsí.
Bharái.
Jandaraiyan
? Niahim,
Sakila.
Bharbhúnja.
Januhen, cf. Jan Mahindru, a Salahan
Bhatti,
juhen.
Kbatrí got. Sambasi,
? Bhebuya.
Jatharwá.
Mai.
Samman Khel.
? Bhittei.
Jatú.
Malak. +
Sangále,
Bhutta.
Jáwam.
Mallhe.
Sárad.
Chahchi.
Jhain. "
Mandábar.
Saroha, Saroa.
Cháhil.
Jhájhúniá.
Mange Khel. Saundhi.
Chandar.
Jhala.
Manj, -jh.
Said.
Chapgar.
Jhamain, -in, -in Maſháns.
Sayyid, Sod.
Channan.
Jhammar.
Matta.
Siahsaroe.
Chauhan.
Jhandar, Jhandrár. Mehrás.
Sobrao.
Ohhaliál.
Jhiman.
Mej.
Sodá.
Dáhar
Jhuán.
Minhas.
Sohna.
Dahíma, said to bo a Jindrán.
Mundh.
Sotakhni.
Brahman got.
Jumditor.
Mural.
Sulhaſe.
Darema.
Kachhor.
Nagah, Nigábá, Sultu Khel.
Deota.
Kachhuá.
said to be a
Tagába.
Dhawan, said to be a Kaith.
Brahman got. Tabím,
Khatrí got.
? Kal.
Núrú.
Taoni.
Dhiá,
Kália.
Pál.
Tarmán.
? Dholijaddan.
Koljuddan.
Pillhi.
Thaddi,
Dungá.
Kandlut.
Panji Khel.
Tunwar, Tunhar,
Gahlot
Kandra,
Pashin, -in.
Tur, Tur,
Galáchi.
Kail.
Patha.
Ugan.
Ganjá.
Kajla.
Pilchi.
Wadhan.
Gapjaur.
Kále, Kale.
Phira Khel. Wary6h.
Gaur, a Brahman got,
Kangapi.
Piron.
Gendi.
Karim.
Puál.
Ghaman.
Ketlí, cf. Khetle. | Pundár,
* A nickname, said to have been bestowed on the founder of the sept, who was skillod
in music and criticised the singing of some dancing girls, who challenged him to sing.
Hence he was dubbed Bhand.
t so called because descended from a Gaurya Rájput who was born in a field.
Said to be a title bestowed by a 'king of Ghazni.' It is also the name of an occupa.
tional group



464
Teli-rája
Thakkar.
These gots or als belong to the whole caste, and are not confined to
any one branch of it as a rule, though in Aubála the Penjas aro said to
have among others the following sections :-Raunji and Dedan (supe.
rior), and Phapute, Jand (wood) (sic), Hatim, Sohatte, Abre, Kamboh,
Boddhan and Malan Hans-which are not found among the Telis.
Of these gots several, e. g., the Badgujjar, Bhatti, Chaahán, Punwar
and Túnwar are of ostensibly Rájput origio : others, like the Gil, being
Játs: others again Kaiaths, Pathána and other castes,
The oaste is, apparently, recruited from time to time by the absorp-
tion of telix by occupation. At first one plying that trade is admitted
to social intercourse, Telis eating and smoking with him, but he is only
allowed connubium after two or three generations. Occasionally, mean.
while, a separate endogamous group is formed, such as the Rain
Kharásiag* in Jiod.
(2). Tarkhán was an Arghún title, and first appears, in Indian
history, as borne by Arghun Khấn, grandson of Hulaku Kuáp, whose
descendants founded the Arghún dynasty of Sind : (1521-1545 A. D.)
Another branch, known as the Tarkbáns, ruled in Sind for 38 years, till
1000 H. 1591-2 A.D. or even later, and its scions still survive in Nasrpur
and Thatta. This title is entirely unconnected with the caste of the
Tarkháns.
TBLÍ RÁJA, a class of faqirs found in the south-west of the Punjab, in Nera
Ghazi Khan and Muzaffargarh, but their original home is said to be
Gujranwala. They receive alms from all classes, and are especially
addicted to cheating women by false prophecies. They are said to
take their pame from the dirty, oily clothes which they think it neces.
sary to wear. For an account of their relation to the shrine of Jawala
Mukhi, see Vol. I.
TERAPANTHI, a sect of the Jains, undoubtedly Digambaras.
TYWATIA, a tribe of Játs, found in Gurgaon : cf. Tavíta.
TAG, a cheat. The only caste in the Punjab which ever evinced a
tendency to take to become professional Thags was the Mazhabi.
THÁRAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
THAAÍM. (1) a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in diontgomery ; (2) a Ját
clan' (agricultural) found iu Multán ; (3) a Khokhar clan (agricul.
tural) found in Shahpur. See under Tahím.
THAKERYE, a Gujar clan (agricultoral) found in Airritsar.
THAKJÁL, a tribe which once held Bhimbar. Tradition says that its last
ruling chief, Bhopal Singh, was slain by Chib Chand, the Katoch, who
had married his daaghter. See Chib.
TAASKAR, TRÁKUR,
See Ráthi and also under Rajbans. Ste sowak Daryá also.
* Their women do not wear the nath, or noso-ring, glass bracelets or clothes dyed with
indigo; but they may wear lac bracelets and the suthan (trourers) in lieu of the lahnga,
TE. H. I., I, pp. 407-500 cf. p. 303.
P. N. II, 56 880, 642.



Thákre-khel-Thind.
465
n of the hills; a lo be generally uses, whic
in those parts hem. He thus for the one hand, ways a Hindu, but
TELKRE-KARL, lit. 'descendants of Thakaria,' a section of the Aroras found
in Miánwáli.
THARÁNA, a soft, apparently of the Kharral, which, with the Bar, and some
Bhawána, Barwána, Khokhar, Kuddan, Máchhi and Sandela furnilies,
holds Chak No. 269 R. B., in the Chenab Colony, Lyallpur District.
All aboriginal inhabitants of this tract, the residents of this village
have all been proclaimed under the Criminal Tribes Act.
THARoLí, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
THATAERA, THATHJÁR. Kalaigar and misgar are virtually synonymous with
thathera.
The Thathera is the man who sells, as the Kasera is the man who
makes vessels of copper, brass, and other mixed metals. He is generally
a Hindu. The word seems to be merely the name of an occupation,
and it is probable that most of the Thatheras wopld return them-
selves as belongiog to some mercantile caste. Those returned are
for the most part Hindu. They are said to wear the sacred thread.
THÁvi, the carpenter and stone-mason of the hills, just as the Ráj of the
plains, who is a bricklayer by occupation, is said to be generally a Tarkhán
by caste. His principal occupation is building the village houses, which
are in those parts made of stone; and he also does what wood-work
is required for them. He thus forms the connecting link between
the workers in wood or Tarkháns on the one hand, and the bricklayers
and masons or Ráj on the other. The Thávi is always a Hindu, and
ranks in social standing far above the Dági or outcast menial, but
somewhat below the Kanet or inferior cultivating caste of the hills.
Sardár Gurdial Singh gåve the following information takon down
from a Thávi of Hoshiárpur :-" An old man said he and his people
were of a Brahman family, but had taken to stone-cutting and so
" had become Thávis, since the Brahmans would no longer intermarry
“ with them. Thus the Thávis include men who are Brahmans, Ráj.
“puts, Kanets, and the like by birth, all of whom intermarried freely
"and thus formed a real Thávi caste, quite distinct from those who merely
“ followed the occupation of Thávi but retained their original caste."
The Thávi of the hills will not eat or intermarry with the Barhái
or Kharádi of the neighbourhood.
Ther, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Thetaiá, an agricultural clan found in Shabpur.
THIND.-(1) a small Ját clan, found in Ludhiana,
Its ancestor, Bichhí, has a samádh at Shabna in that District whence
members of the clan have taken bricks and built samádhs in their own
villages. After a wedding the bride and bridegroom play with twigs
after worshipping the samadh. The bridegrooun first strikes the bride
seven times with the twigs and then the bride strikes him in turn.
Alms offered to the sanádh are taken by a Brahman. The inilk of a cow
or buffalo is first offered on the samádh and some is also given to a
Brahman. The ghi of the first Amáwas is also offered on the samádh
and given to a Brahinan; (2) a Karboh clan (agricultural) both Hindu
und Muhammadan, found in Montgomery.
Favi of Hunghe gave me inter



466
Thobá—Thothú.
Tgolá, Thobi = Dhobi, q. v. But the term is also said to mean a well-
sinker in the Punjab: ? = Toba.
T90KÁ, & syn. for Tarkhan-at least in the Eastern Punjab: -Sikh or
Singh, the carpenter caste among Sikhs: Panjabi Dicty., p. 1130.
THORI.-It appears almost certain that, so far as the plains of the Punjab
are concerned, the Thori and the Aseri refer to the same caste. In the
hills* the men who carry merchandise on pack animals are known as
Thoris ; and it is possible that the Thoris of the Simla Hills are nothing
more than persons who follow this occupation, for it is improbable that
the Aberi of Rajputána should be found in those hills, and the word
seems to be applied to anybody who carries on beāsts of burden without
regard to castes. Still, the Thoris do seem to have a connection with
the Banjáras. They are said by Tod to be carriers in the Kájputána
deserts; and the headmen of both Thoris and Banjáras are called
Náik. It is not at all impossible that the Thoris may be allied to or
identical with the lower class of Banjaras, while the Aheris are true
hunters. But in the Punjab plains the two words seem to be used in-
differently, and we must consider then: as synonymous for the present.
Şir James Wilson says that an Aheri is called Náik as a term of
honour, acd Thori as a term of contempt. The Aheris or Heris or
Thoris are by heredity hunters and fowlers, and Sir Henry Elliott says
that they have proceeded from the Dhánaks, though they do not eat
dead carcasses as the Dhánaks do. Their name is said to signify
cowherd,' from hor, a herd of cattle. They are vagrant in their
habits, but not infrequently settle dowa in villages where they find
employment. They catch and eat all sorts of wild animals, pure and
impure, and work in reeds and grass. In addition to these occupations
they work in the fields, and especially move about in gangs at harvest
time in search of employment as reapers ; and they cut wood and
grass and work as general labourers, and on roads and other earthworks.
In Sirsa they occasionally cultivate, while in Karnál they often make
saltpetre, and in Rájputána they are employed as out-door servants,
and even as musicians. Their home is Rajputána, especially Jodhpur
and the prairies of Bikáner, and they are found in the Punjab only in
Delhi, Hissár and the south-east of the Punjab generally. In appear-
ance and physique they reseable the BAWARIA ; but they have no special
dialect of their own. A few in the Sikh States are Sikhs; but the
remainder are Hindus. They are considered outcasts, and made to
live beyond the village ditch. They do not keep doukeys, nor eat
beef or carrion, and they worship the ordinary village deities, but
especially Babaji of Kohmand in Jodhpur and Khetrpál of Jodhpur.
The Chamarwá Brahmans officiate at their marriages and on like occa-
sions. They burn their dead and send the ashes to the Ganges. Mr.
Christie wrote :-" What beef is to the Hindu and pork to the Masal-
mán, horse-flesh is to the Aheri.” They have clans with Rájput
naipes, all of which intermarry one with another. They are said in
sobie parts to be addicted to thieving ; but this is not their general
character,
TROTOÁ, a Ját clan (agricultural), found in Multán.
-
* The agriculturists of the Salt Range carry salt on bullocks to Ráwalpindi in autumn.
These carriers are called thort, which describes their occupation merely (Wace ).



Thothia-Tibetan.
467
THOTHIA, an agricultural clan, found in Shahpur.
Thuána, a sept of Kanets, found in Hindúr (Nálágarh).
THUTRÁL, a tribe of Muhammadan Jáțs found in Gujrát. It claims Surajbansi
crigin by descent from Thathu, son of Rajá Karn, whose other son
Nárú, founded the Narwá.
Tiách, a got or tribe of the Mahton which has a bâra or group of 12
villages in the Garhshankar tahsil of Hoshiarpur on the Kapurthala
border.
TIBBI LUND, a small organised Baloch tuman wholly confined to the Dera
Gházi Khán district, where they occupy a small area in the inidst
of the Gurohápi country. They are composed of a Lund and a
Khoda clan, the former comprising some two-thirds of their whole
numbers. To the Khosas a third clan, cailed Rind, but of impure blood
is also attached. These three clans were recently united under the
authority of the Tibbi Lund tumandár.
TIBETAN... The only true Tibetans found in the Punjab are the people of
Spiti. These speak a dialect of Western Tibetan or Bhuti, as it is
vaguely termed by the hill people who speak the Pohári dialects of
Punjáb.
In Spitia Tibetan's individuality is not fixed by his and his father's
names because he has two, and often three recognised fathers. It is
fixed by (1) his personal name, (2) by his house name, (3) by his clan
name. This last is the name of the phas-pun-ship (father-brother-ship)
to which he belongs. Each phas-pun is exogamous, a custom noticed by
the inost ancient Chinese authors who describe the Tibetans, and every
phas-pun has to look after the cremation of its dead and in every
village it usually erects & (m)chodrten or mani walls to their memory,
its name being inscribed on the votive tablet of the monument. The
names of their clans are (like the als among the Brahmans, Rájputs
etc., of the Himalayas) often local. Thus the names of the phas-pun
of Khalatu indicate that the greater part of the population of the
village came from Gilgit. In Spiti the phas-pun is called ru(8) pa
or bones, as Sir J. B, Lyall said, but he was wrong in writing that the
same ru(s)pa are to be found in all the villages of Spiti. Some of
them are scattered about in a number of villages, but quite new names
will also be found. Of the names given by Lyall the following are
certainly Tibetan : (i) Gyazhingpa ‘large field,' (2) Khyungpo garuda
inen,' a very common name in the pre-Buddhist period ---, (3) Lonchenpa,
great ministers' and (4) Nyegspa, & word found in the earliest Tibetan
records. The two other names appear to be non-Tibetan, Hesir being
doubtless the Hensi caste found in Kulu.
Dillage life in Spiti.
The Spiti men buy old cattle from the Láhulis, and slaughter them
in the autumn to furnish the larder for the six months of winter.
Parched barley-flour made into porridge is the every day food in Spiti.
It is also eaten boiled with bırtter and green herbs into a kind of soup.
The houses in Spiti as in Láhul are very different in appearance from
those of Kulu and Kángfa. They are two or sometimes three storeys
high, with flat roofs; the lower storey is occupied by the cattle, horses,



468
Tibetans in Spiti.
and sheep and goats, the upper one contains the room lived in by the
family. In Spiti these rooms are commonly three in number, and sor.
round on three sides an open court, one of them is the family chapel,
which is ordinarily very well furnished with images, large prayer
cylinders, religious pictures, books, and sacramental vessels, the others
are good sized rooms lighted by small windows hung with wooden shutters,
the largest is about 20 feet square, and has a roof supported by a double
row of uprigbt posts. At the corners of the house are flag-staffs
consisting of poles, from which hang black yak's tails. The walls are
whitewashed inside and out, and neatly topped with a coping of faggots.
The furniture in a Spiti house has a general resemblance to that in a
Láhul one, but tubs and pails, the woodwork of which comes from
Bashahr, are much used, and the churn for beating up the tea with
salt and butter is never missing.
In Spiti polyandry is not recognised, as only the elder brother
marries and the younger ones become monks, but there is not the least
a version to the idea of two brothers cohabiting with the same woman,
and it often happens in an unrecognised way, particularly among the
landless classes, who send no sons into the monasteries. Sir James
Lyall was informed that, when the bridegroom's party goes to bring the
bride from her father's house, they are met by a party of the bride's
friends and relations who stop the path, whereupon a sham fight of a
very rough description ensues, in which the bridegroom and his friends,
before they are allowed to pass, are well drubbed with good thick
switches. If a man wishes to divorce his wife without her consent,
he must give her all she brought with ber, and a field or two besides
by way of maintenance. On the other hand, if a wife insists ou leav.
ing her husband, she cannot be prevented from so doing, but, if no
fault on the husband's side is proved, he can retain her jewels, and he
can do so also if she elopes with another man, and in addition can re-
cover something from the co-respondent by way of fine and damages.
There is a recognised ceremony of divorce whicb is sometimes used
when both parties consent. Husband and wife hold the ends of a thread,
repeating meanwhile :-" Ope father and mother gave, another father
and mother took away : as it was not our fate to agree, we separate
with mutual good will," the thread is then severed by applying a light
to the middle. After divorce a woman is at liberty to marry whom she
pleases. If her parents are wealthy, they celebrate the second marriage
much like the first, but with less expense; if they are poor, a very
slight ceremony is used.
Corpses are ordinarily burnt, and the ashes thrown into a river, or
made into a figure of the deceased and deposited into a chorten or
pyramidical cenotaph in the case of great men. Burning is apparently
the only practice in Láhul, but in Spiti the dead are said to be some
times exposed on the hills to be eaten by wild beasts, or cut into small
pieces and thrown to dogs and birds, according to the custom of Great
Tibet, where these beneficent methods of disposing of the body are
philosophically preferred as most likely to be pleasing to the heavenly
powers. In the public rooms of some of the Spiti monasteries you
are shown masonry pillars which contain the bodies of deceased abbots
buried there in full canonicals in a sitting posture,



469
Tibetans in Spiti.
In Spiti the ordinary dress of the men consists of a skull cap, a long
loose or frock or coat of thick woollen cloth girt in at the waist by a
long and broad sash, and a pair of boots with leathern soles and cloth
tops reaching to and gathered below the knee. Some who can afford it
wear also a silk or cotton undercoat, the coat is generally the natural
color of the wool, the other articles are red, or red and black. Every
man wears a loose necklace of rough lumps of turquoise, amber, and
other stones mixed with coral beads. A bright iron pipe and a knife
in sheath are stuck in his belt, from which hang also by steel chains
his chakmak or flint and steel and tinder box, a metal spoon, and a
bunch of the most fantastically-shaped keys. In the fold of his coat next.
the skin be carries a wooden or metal drinking-cup, a tobacco-pouch,
some parched barley-meal; and other odds and ends. Many wear their
hair plaited into a tail like Chinxmen. If of a serious tone-a profess.
ing Buddhist (to adopt a phrase used among some Christians) -he will
never go out without a prayer-wbeel in one hand, and a religious book
or two slung on his back, and repeats the Om mani at every pause in
the conversation. The mouks, when not engaged in religious functions,
go bareheaded, and wear a rosary of beads instead of a necklace : the
cut of their coat and boots is the same, but the cloth is dyed either
red or yellow. Astrologers dress in red from head to foot, the women
wear a coat, sash, and boots like the men, but the coat is, he thought,
always of a dark color, they also wear loose red trousers, the ends of
which are tucked into the boots, and a shawl over their shoulders, they
go bareheaded, and wear their hair in a number of small plaits which
hang down the back. Ou the top of their heads the married women
wear a pirak or silver ornament from which depeod strings of beads on
both sues of their faces, and long tails of leather studded with coarse
turquoises. The girls wear only a single turquoise threaded on the hair
near the parting : this, like the spood in Scotland, is a sign of their
being upmarried. In winter both sexes wear great-coats made of
sheepskin with the wool on.
The great mass of the arable land consists of the holdings of
the talfas or revenue-payers, which are each separate estates of the
nature of household allotments. Within these estates the following
occupants may be found :-
Firstly, in each there is the kang chimpa (great house) or head of
the family, who is primarily responsible for the revenue, the begár or
forced labuur, and the share of common ospenses demandable on the
whole holding. He is the eldest son, for primogeniture prevails, but it
does not follow that his father must be dead, for by custom of the
country the father retires from the headship of the family when his
eldest son is of full age and has taken unto himself a wife. There are
cases in which father and son agree to live on togetber in one house,
but they are very rare. On each estate there is a kind of dower house
with a plot of land attached, to which the father in these cases retires.
When installed there, he is called the kang chungpu (small houseman).
The amount of land attached differs on different estates, where it is
big, the kang chungpa pays a sum of cash, or cash and grain, about
equal to its ratable assessment, but where it is small, as is usually the
case he pays a small cash fee only, which is really rather a hearth-tax



470
Tibetans in Spiti.
than a share of the land revenuo, to which, however, it is credited in
collection. The kang changpa is not liable for any share of common
expenses (a heavy charge in Spiti) nor for performance of begár or
forced labour. On occasions of a great demand for men to do some
work near the village he may be impressed, bnt the principle is that
he is free. Sometimes, in the absence of a living father, the widowed
mother, or the grandfather, or an uncle, aunt, or unmarried sister,
occupies the small house and land on the same terms. A yang chungpa
is the term used to describe a person living on an estate in a separate house
of lower degree than that of the kang chungpa. Such a person is al-
ways some relation of the head of the family, he may be the grand.
father who has been pushed out of the small house by the retirement of
his own son, the father, but it is commoner to find unmarried sisters,
aupts, or their illegitimate offspring in this position. A small plot of
land is generally attacbed to the house, and a few anpas of revenue
are paid, but rather as a hearth-tax on account of grass, wood, water,
etc., than as the share of the land-tax on the plot held. In proof of
this some yang changpas have no land attached to the house, but pay
like the others. Most of these people would be entitled to some main-
tenance from the head of the family if he did not give them a plot of
land. They are not liable to be impressed for ordinary begár, but most
help on occasions of great demand near home. They often do distant
begår, however, in place of the head of the family by mutual agreement.
On many holdings another class of people are found living in a depen-
dent position towards the kang chimpa or head of the family. They
have a small house to themselves, with or without a patch of land
attached, generally they pay an anna or two to revenue, whether they
hold land or not. In fact in this respect, and with regard to liability
to begar, they are much on the same footing as the yang chungpa, the
fundamental difference is that they are nou related to the head of the
family, and have got their house or house and land, not with reference
to auy claim to maintenance, but out of the favour, or for the mutual
benefit of both parties. They are, therefore, expected to do a great
deal of field work for him. People of this class are called dotul, literally
smoke-makers, because they have a hearth to themselves, but no other
interest in the land. To mark the fact that they hold of one particular
landholder, the word ránki, meaning private or particular, is added.
All land held by the kang chungpas and by yang chungpas and ránki,
dotuls, pertains to the holding or allotment, cannot be alienated, and
lapees to the kang chimpa. The latter could not of course evict a kang
chungpa, and the general feeling is that when he has given a plot to
a yang chungpa, he could not resume it, except with consent, but he
could resume from a ránki dotul, and would be considered quite justified
in so doing on the grounds of customary service not having been pro-
perly performed. The constitution of the Spiti family has justly been
described as a system of primogeniture whereby the eldest son
succeeds in the lifetime of his father. The working of this system
in the case of proprietary holdings of the first class is described under
Kang-chimpa, on p. 473 of Vol. II. In the case of the little plots held
by periple of the dotul class, father and son live on together, as the
land is too small to be divided, and there are no responsibilities which
father could transfer with the land to the son. In the same way two
or more brothers of this class live on together, often with a wife in



Tíráhi-Tola.
471
common, till one or other, generally the weakest, is forced out to find &
subsistence elsewhere. Working for food or wages, and not the plot
of land, is the chief source of subsistence to these people.
Tíráni, an inhabitant of Tíráb.
Tirmází, a Sayad clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
TIWÁNA, (1) a tribe of Rajput status which holds the country at the foot of
the Shahpur Salt Range. They have played a far wore prominent part
in Punjab history than their mere numbers would render probable. They
are said to be Punwár Rájputs, and descended from the same ancestor
as the Siál and Gasba. They probably entered the Punjab together
with the Siál, and certainly before the close of the 15th century. They
first settled at Jahangir on the Indus, but eventually moved to their
present abodes in the Shahpur thal, where they built their chief town
of Mitha Tiwána.* The Tiwána resisted the advancing forces of the
Sikhs long after the rest of the aistrict had fallen before them. They
are now 'a half pastoral, half agricultural tribe, and a fine hardy race
of men who make good soldiers, though their good qualities are sadly
marred by a remarkably quarrelsome disposition, which is a sonirce
of never-ending trouble to themselves and all with whom they are
brought in contact. (2). A tribe of Játs. In Pațiála they claim
descent from Lakkhu, 7th in descent from Tiwána, a Punwar Rajput
and still discountenance karewa. They migrated from Dhárá Nagri in
the 13th century. They worship a Sati called Dádi Bir Sadhoi, to
whom they offer the first milk of a cow, and, at weddings, 54 yards of
cloth, a rupee and two laddus. (3). A Kamboh clan (agricultural)
found in Amritsar.
Toba, a well-digger; also called ghotakhor i. e. diver, in Ludhiána. In
Gujrát the Tobas are said to be called Sangh or Singh ; but Singha
appears to be strictly applicable only to a well-finder.
TOBLA, see under Hatikhel.
Topí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Togochi, see Táwá.
Tore, a Ját tribe found in Jínd. They are of unknown origin.
Bhagwán Dás, the saint, was a Tokas and his descendants are called
Swami, but marry among Játs. The Tokas or Swamis do not smoke
or eat onions, avoid castrating bullst and only use milk after first
offering it to their Gurú.
TOKHI, the most prominent of all the Ghilzai Afghán tribes, till the Hotak
gave rulers to Kandahár about 1700 A. D. They hold the valley of
the Tarnak and the north valley of the Argbandáb with Kalát-i-Ghilzai
their principal centre. The Kharoti are an offshoot of them. Some
Tokhi visit Dera Ismail Khán.
TOLA, a tribe of Muhammadan Jáțs found in Gujrát. It claims to be an
Offshoot of the Gondal Játs, and says that its ancestor, being childless,
vowed that if he had a son he would give his weight in gold and silver
# The subsequent history of the family is narrated at pages 518 to 584 of Griffin's Punjab
Chief: and at page 40ff of Colonel Davies' Shahpur Report...
+ Probably because they are Shaivas and the bull is sacred to Shiva,



472
Toniyán--Traggar.
to the poor. His son was so weighed and was called Tola--fr. tolná,
to weigh.
Toniyán, a Ját olan (agricultural) found in Multán.
TOR, see under Utmánzai.
TOR GUNv, see under Spín Gond.
Torwál, a non-Pațbán tribe which, with the Garhwía, occupied both lower
and Upper Swát prior to the invasion of Swát by the Yusufzai Patbáns
in the 16th century A. D. They now hold the Swát Kohistân and pay a
nominal tribute to the Khushwaqt family ruling in Yasin and Mastúj.
Little is yet known of them. The Torwáls speak Torwali. Biddulph
describes the Torwálik and Bashkárik as the two communities of Torwal
and BASHKÁR in the Panjkora and Swát valloys. The former with
20,000 souls are the more numerous, and the latter number some
12,000 to 15,000 souls. The two communities are closely connected
and intermarry, and in appearaoçe they do not differ from the tribes
of the Indas valley, though separation has produced considerable
diffərences in their dialects. The Torwálik must have once occupied
some extensive valley like Buner, but they have been thrust up into
the more mountainous tracts by the Patháng* to whom their attitude
is one of passive resistance.
The Torwálik have retained few of their ancient customs save their
national dances, and in Bashkár dances of women take place at which
men are not allowed to be present. Both communities allow marriage
of first cousins, but those between uncle and niece or niece's daughter
are forbidden. In Torwál a bride-price is paid, and the bridegroum's
party is accompanied at the wedding by men dressed as women who
dance and jest, and the whole village takes part in the entertainment
of his friends. In this community women inherit the father's land in
equal shares with sons, & custom in advance of those found among
other tribes of the Hindu Kush. Tho. Muhammadan calendar is in
use in Torwal - but not in BadeKAR.
The Bashkárik are the most degraded of all the so-called Dard tribes,
quarrelsome among themselves yet unable to offer any resistance to
the raids to which they are exposed on every side. In spite of a fertile
soil and abundant flocks' and herds they live in great squalor. They
say they became Musalmans nine generations ago and till quito
recently used to expose their dead on the hill-tops in coffins.
Totaza), see under Marwat.
TOTRU, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
TRAG, a tribe of Játs found in the Isakhel tahsil of Mianwali. Living
among the Niázi Pathans they have begun to call themselves Niázi.
TRAGGAR, a tribe of Ját status which holds a few villages on the Chenab,
both in Multán next to the Tahím, and in Muzaffargarh. They say
they are Bhatti Rajputs and take their name from their ancestral hoino,
Traggar, in Bíkáner. They first migrated to Jhans but about 160
years ago quarrelled with the Siál and left tbat district to settle on
the banks of the Chenáb.
* The Pathéns call them, and all other Muhammadaos of Indian descent in the Hindu Kushi
valleys, Kohistanis.



Trakháne-Túnwar.
478
TRAKHÁNE, a family, now in reality extinct, which gave a line of Ra's to
Gilgit from about the beginning of the 14th till its extinction early
in the 19th century. The founder of the dynasty was Azor who
married the daughter of Shiri Buddatt, the last Shin Rá of Gilgit, bot
it derives its name from Trákhán, 7th in descent from Azor. It has
two cognate branches, the Möglote and Girkis. To the former branch
belongs the present Rá of Gilgit, and the Girkis founded the principality
of Hunza. 'The Trakhané furnishes an instance of descent in the
female line, for on the death of Mirza his daughter Jowári succeeded
him and married, but as soon as her son was 12 years old dismissed
her husband and abdicated in her son's favour. He became the father
of Sulaiman Khan, who assumed the name of Gauri Tham Khán, the
last Rá who maintained his independence.
TRERH, a thieving class found in Ráwalpindi. Cf. Tarer.
TRUND, the offspring of a Satti, Dhúnd or Jasgam by a low-caste wife or
concubine.
TULE, a Kbarral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Tuliát, a small branch, little esteemed, of the Gakkhars, with which the
other clans of that tribe do not interwarry.
TOLLA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
TUNG, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
TUNGAB, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Túnwak (often contracted to Túr), the principal Rajput tribe of the Eastern
Plains. Though a sub-division of the Jádúbansi it is generally reckoned
as one of the 36 royal tribes of Rajputs. It furnished India with the
dynasty of Vikramaditya, the beacon of later Hindu chronology,
and Delhi with its last Indian rulers, Anangpál, the last Túnwar Raja,
abdicating in favour of his Chauhán grandchild Pirthi Ráj,* in whose
time the Musalmáds conquered Nonih-Western India. An early
Anangpál Túowar founded in 792 A.D. the city of Delhi on the ruins
of the ancient Indrapat, and his dynasty ruled there for three and
a half centuries. It is therefore natural that the Túnwar should be
found chiefly in the eastern districts of the Province. In Delhi itself
indeed, they are less vumerous than might have been expected. But
they are exceedingly numerous in Ambála, Hissár, and Sirsa. The
name being a famous one, many Rájputs of various tribes which have
no real connection with the Túnwar have adopted it. Thus in Karpal
the Chauhán Túnwar are probably Chauhans.
The Túnwar are the westernmost of the great Rajput tribes of the
eastern Punjab. When ojected from Delhi they are said to bave
settled at Pundri in Karpálit on the Ambalá border and once the beat
of the Pundir, and thence to have spread both north and south.
They now occupy Hariána, or the greater portion of Hissárt and
rous than might bilan, Hissár, ibes which have
. * Another version, from Karnál, makes Pirthi Raj sister s son of Anangpál who placed his
nephew in charge of his kingdom while he went to bathe in the Ganges and on his retorn
was refused admission to Delhi.
+ They hold a compact block between; Sháhábád and Pebowa, including the township of
Pánipat, their villages being grouped in the bawanis of Lukhi, Nahmi, Bagthala, Jaansa and
Igmailabad. From the latter was founded Thaska Miranji in the reign of Mabammad Bbíh.



474
Tur
Turi.
stretch across Karnal and the south of Pațiála into the west of the
Ambala district, separating the Chauháu and other Rájputs who hold
the Jumna districts to the east of them from the great Ját tribes of
tbe. Málwa which lie to their west. There is however a Chauhan colony
to the north-west of them on the lower Ghaggar in the Hissar district
and Patiala. The Játu of Hariána are a Túnwar clan. In Hissár they
still retain possession of the villages of Bahuna, Basti Somana, Daulat
and Jamalpur. They are also found as far to the west as the kárdáris
of Minchinabád and Khairpur in Bahawalpur, in which State they'
have six sépts :-i. Sukhere, ii. Kalloke, iii. Bhane-ke, iv. Hind ane,
v. Sango-ke, vi, Chadhrar.
The T'ún wars are undoubtedly the oldest Rajput tribe in the Hissár
district, which they entered in two streams : the first during the
period of Túnwar ascendancy at Delhi under Anangpál J, represented by
the cattle-lifting communities of Bahuna, Basti and the adjacent
villages. The second wave of immigration occurred under Anangpál
Il as already related in Vol. II supra, at p. 378, 8. 0. Játú. The Tún-
wars are nearly all Muhammadans in Hissár, and say they were
converted voluntarily before the time of Aurangzeb.
Tor, (1) an agricultural clau found in Shabpur, (2) a Hindu Ját clan
(ngricultural) found in Montgomery, (3) a Gujar clan (agricultural)
found in Amritsar, and (4) a Baloch clan (agricultural) found in
Montgomery. See under Túnwar.
TUR-KHEL, the weavers of Kálábágh and Mári on the Indus who claim
Pathán descent. The name is said to mean' gentlemen of tbe loom':
fr. tur, 'loom' and khel, 'group' for tribe.'
Toki, (1) the musician of the Simla hills who beats the drum when & corpse
is catried out to the burning ground. They get & share in the offer-
ings of the dead and receive the shrond, besides getting fees in pro-
portion to the means of the deceased. They are also given grain at
harvest time. As they take the offeriogs of the dead they are consider-
ed unclear, and rank a little lower than a Bári or Lohár in the hills.
They aleo generally do sewing work also. They marry in their own
community, and in the upper bills a Kanet may not cohabit with a
Túri woman, but in the lower he could not be outcasted for so doing.
A Ráhu or Kuran Kanet might possibly keep a Túri woman without
much risk of excommunication. The Túri generally are not agricol
turists, but live by singing and musical performances.
(2). Early in the 16th century some 60 families of a Hindki or
Indian race called Tári moved up from their earlier seats opposite
Niláb on the Indus in the Attock district into the Kurram valleys where
they settled down as hamsáyas or vassals of the BANGASH Pacháds or
Pathans of the Bangashát. Weakened by internal dissensions and
migration to Kohát, the Bangash lust ground, while the Thris were
reinforced by fresh arrivals from home, who were attracted by the
fertility of the Kurram valleys, and gradually supplanted the Bangash
in its possession, until only two villages, Shalozán* and Zerán remained
* Shalozan village is said to be closely connected with the provinces of Mahtnderan and
Azir baijan. It is noted for the beauty of its womon.



The Turis of Kurram.
475
to the latter. I'he Túris however had adopted the Sbia tenets of their
overlords and still retain them. Each facily has its hereditary
| moarners, who possess great influence and take the place of the mulláhs
in the Pathán tribes- there being no mulláhs among the Túris, wbo as
Shiás pay great reverence to Sayadsand the matim kotha or mourning
house of the village, at which on every Friday and 13 days in the
Moharram all the villagers assemble, is the centre of their religious
life. They must make, if means, permit, a pilgrimage to Karbala and
Mashhad, and are closely connected with Persia. On the other hand,
few go to Mecca.*
The Túris aro also called Panjplára or the five fathers' and are
divided into as many sections or clans whose descent, real or fictitious,
is thus given :-
Sargalla (originally settled in Malána, Chardai (originally settled in Paiwar,
Upper Kurram).
Upper Kurram).
Mastu Khel, Hamza Khel, Alizai, Ghundi Khel,
Duperzai,
7 per cent. 8 per cent.
5 por cont. 6 per cont. 11 per cent
Callod Landizai after their
mother Landai.
Of the cultivated area of the valley the Túris now hold 37 per cent.
which is distributed as above. The Landizai and Duperzai evidently
book shares according to the rule of chúndavand, i.e. the groups of
sons of each mother took an equal share. Each section is further
subdivided into septs or families and each had its sarishta khel or chief
family in which was vested authority to collect levies for war and
make other executive arrangements. When on its ocou fation by the
Túris the valley was divided among the five clans to each was allotted a
plárina or ancestral share in the country, and these are still remembered.
Within each clan's pláring the Túris constituted themselves náiks or
overlords in their turn and all the races under them were regarded as their
hamsáyas or dependents. There were four such groups. First, the
conquered Bangash and other tribes who were settled on the mountain
slopes for purposes of defence. These had to pay certain dues in
token of allegiance and were further bound not to sell or mortgage their
lands to anybody save their náiks. Next came the social hamsáyas
of the mercantile class who paid certain dues (kaba) on births, betrothals,
weddings, etc., to their overlords. Then came the pastoral, like the
Ghilzai pomads, who paid duos in kind for grazing, repaired homesteads
and manured fields. Lastly came the common or agricultural hamsáyas
who were virtaally tenants paying produce rents. Of all their
feudal rights the only one that survives in the case of the first
or political hamsáyas is the right of pre-emption, but the obligations
of the other three classes still subsist. The old Pathán custom of vesh
or periodical re-distribution of the land still survives in the case of the
backward village of Jallandhar and there land is allotted in equal
sbares to every man, woman and child every four years. But some
* Raverty regarded the Turis as Roshanias, not. as Shias. They have or had a curious
custom. When they meet a stranger, they ask first if he is 'straight' or 'crooked,' putting
the forofinger to the forehead, first straight, then bent. By straight' they mean Shia,



476
Turk.
villages have accepted permanent partitions, wbile others have agreed
to divide the land till the next Revenue Settlement is made. Again, as
the valley was not conquered at a blow- the acquisitions had to be
divided as they were made among the various clads. The result is
that the possessions of each clan are scattered about over the
whole valley and do not lie in compact blocks. But to this day a
distinction is observed between pioneer families who took part in the
earliest conquests and those who came after them. No Túri is con-
sidered as asil or of blue blood unless he can point out his possessions
in the first Túri colonies of Malána and Peiwar. But some of the
clans, mostly Saragalla and a few Duperzai, are still nomad and
pastoral, and those who live in tents and summer in Upper Kurram,
but move down in winter to the pastures of Lower Kurram are called
kuchi as opposed to those who have settled in hamlets and are called
kothi. Intensely democratic the Túris own no chiefs and their sense of
individuality is so strong that each hamlet, with its central tower
and circle of plane trees, is known by the name of its present holder
and it is an offence to call it by its founder's name.
The aims in life of every Túri are to marry the woman he loves,
murder the enemy he hates, play the swell as a malik, collect money by
corruption and wash away his sins by a pilgrimage to Karbala. In the
famous battle at that place some Byzantine Christians fell on the side
of the sons of Ali and that event has given a religious touch to the
Túris' devotion to the British Government. Unfortunately the Túri
though shrewd in business and above the average in intelligence is
lavish in his expenditure at weddings and in bribing the jirgas. The
costs of shádi (marriage), háde (bribery) and badi (feuds) account for
about four-fifths of the alienations of their land, but their expro-
priation has not yet reached alarming dimensions. Formerly
splendid horsemen and born moss-troopers the Túris still make excellent
irregular soldiers, but they are litigious and saturated with party
feeling which makes them utterly untruthful. Still their hospitality
is great and the fidelity of a Túri escort or badragga proverbial.
Though darker in complexion than the Bangash they are a fine people
physically and the kulach or fathom* of a full-grown Túri is by repute
6} foot.
TURK, in the Punjab proper means, probably invariably, a Tarkomán native
of Túrkistán and of Mongolian race. But in the Delhi territory the
villagers, accustomed to describe the Mughals of the empire as Turks,
use the word as synonymous with "official'; even Hinda clerks of
the Káyath caste being described as Túrks merely because they were
in Government employ. And about Karpál any Mughal, Sayad, Pathan
or Shaikh will be called Túrk as a compliment. On the Baloch frontier
again the word Turk is commonly used as syuonymous with Mughal. The
Turks of the Punjab are practically confined to Hazára and are doubt-
less the representatives of the colony of Kárlugh Turks who came
into the Punjab with Tamerlane (1399 A.D.) and possessed themselves
of the Pakhli tract in that District, which apparently included the
Tanáwal, Dhamtaur, and Swáti country and was politically attached
* The length to which the two arms can be extended,



Túsi.
477
to Kashmir These men were dispossessed of their territory by Swátis
and Tanáolis from across the Indus about the beginning of the 18th
century; and the Turks now returned are doubtless their descendants.
The word Turk is a Tartar word meaning a “wanderer”; thus in
poetry the Sun is called “ the Turk of China," that is of the East,
or “ the Turk of the Sky." The Turks of Gurdaspur are said to be
rope-makers by occupation and their speciality used to be the manu-
facturer of tappars* of tát, or sack-cloth, until the competition of the
jute industry affected their trade. In the Simla Hills and Kulu the
term is virtually synonymous with Musalmán.
Túsi, one of the Súfi sects. It derivəs its name from Shaikh Ala-ud-din
Túsi, who is buried at Tús.
* Sack.cloth made of goats' hair': Punjábi Dicty., p. 1105.



479
Udásí.–Syn. Nánakputra : the principal religious order of the Sikbs. The
Udásís are almost certainly the oldest of the Sikis orders, and trace
their foundation to Srí Chand,* the elder son of Gurá Nának. The
term udási means . sorrow' or sadness, from Sanskrit udás, "sad' and
their separation, which has sometimes been wrongly termed excommuni.
ration, by the 3rd Gurú, Amr Dás, is described in Vol. I under Sikhism.
This separation is sometimes ascribed to Guru Arjan.
The Udási tenets, though largely tinctured with Hindu asceticism, found
many proselytes among the descendants and followers of the orthodox
Gurús, and Har Gobind, the 6th Gurú, bestowed Gurditta, + his eldest
fon on Sri Chand. Gurdittá had four disciples who founded as many
chapters (dhuán) of the order. These were Bábát Hasan, Phúl, Gondá
and Almast, whose followers constitute the bará akhára, or senior
assembly. Phera, & disciple of Har Rai, the 7th Gurú, established
aiiother chapter, called the chhoța akhára.
The Udásís are celibate, at least in theory, and when so in practice
are called Odási Nanga or naked.' But Maclagan gives a different
explanation of this term as will be seen from the following extract
from his account of the order :-" The Udásís ara recruited from all
castes and will eat food from any Hindu. They are almost always
celibates, and are sometimes, though not usually, congregated in
monasteries. They are generally found wandering to and from their
sacred places, such as Amritsar, Dera Nának, Kartárpur, and the
like. They are said to be numerous in Málwa and in Benares. In our
Census returns they appear strongest in Jallundur, Rohtak, and
Ferozepur. It is a mistake to say that they are not generally recogniz.
ed as Sikhs ; they pay special reverence to tbe Adi-granth, but also
respect the Granth of Gobind Singh, and attend the same shrines als
the Sikhs generally. Their service consists of a ringing of bells and
blare of instruments and chanting of hymns and waving of lights
before the Adi-granth and the picture of Bábá Nának. They are,
however, by no means uniform in their customs. Some wear long hair,
some wear matted locks, and others cut their hair. Some wear tilaks
or caste-marks Fothers do pot. Some burn the dead in the ordinary
* Malcolm says Dharm Chand, clearly an error.
* On a hill near Rawalpindi lived Budhan Shah, a Muhammadan faqir, to whom Bábá
Nának had entrusted some milk till his successor should come to claim it. Seeing Gurditta
approaching Budhan Shah begged him to assume Nának's form. This Gurditta did and
thereby earned the title and dignity of Bábá : Maclagan, $ 90. He lived mainly at Kartárpur
but died at Kiratpur where he has a handsome sbrine. From another shrine there, called
the Manji Sahib' he is said to have shot an arrow which fell in the plain below at a place
called Pátálpuri, long used as a burning ground for the Sodhi Khatris.
$1, Bábá Hasna's shrine is at Charankaul, near Apandpur.
2. Phál Sáhib’s shrines are at Bahadurpur and Chínighatí in Hoshiarpur.
3. Gondá Sáhib is represented at Shikárpar in Sind and at the Bangalwála Gurdwárá
in Amritsar.
*. Almast Sahib is represented at Jagannath and Naini Tál: Maclagan, $ 90.
$ This appears to be the Sangat Sábib.



480
The Udásrs.
Hindu way ; some after barning erect samádhs or monuments; others
apparently bury the dead. They are for the most part ascetics, but
some are said to be engaged in ordinary secular pursuits. The ordinary
dress of tho ascetics is of a red colour, but a large section of them go
entirely naked, except for the waistcloth, and rub ashes over their
bodies. These, like the naked sections of other orders, are known as
Nange; they pay special reverence to the ashes with which they smoar
their bodies, and which are said to protect them equally from either
, extreme of temperature. Their most binding oath is on a ball of ashes.
In Ludhiána the Udásís are described as mostly Játs by origin, the
Chela, or disciple and successor, being usually chosen from this tribe
and are found to be in possession of the dharmsálas in Hindu villages,
where they distribute food to such as come for it and read the granth
both of Bábá Nának and of Guru Gobind Singh, although they do not
attach much importance to the latter. The head of the college is
called a mahant and tbe disciples chelas. They live in Sikh as well as
in Hindu villages, and it is probably on this account that they do
not quite naglect Guru Gobind Singh. They rarely marry ; and if they
do' so, generally lose all influence, for the dharmsála soon becomes a
private residence closed to strangers. But in some few families, such
as that of Jaspál Bángar, which keeps a large langar or almshodno
going, it has always been the custom to marry, the endowments being
large enough to support the family and maintain the institution ; but
the eldest son does not in this case succeed as a matter of course. A
chela is chosen by the mahant, or by the family. If & mahant whose
predecessors bave not married should do so, he would lose all his
weight with the people
The great shrine at Dera Bábá Nának, in the Gurdaspur district, is
in the custody of a community of Udásí sádhs, whose mahant used to
be appointed with the consent of the Bedís. Another shrine at the
same place, known as Táhli Sahib, from a large táhli, or shisham tree
which grow close to it, was founded by Srí Chand, and is also looked
after bg mahants of the Udási order."
Another chapter of the Udási order, said sometimes to be one of the
four dhuán, is called the Bhagat Bhagwán. Once Bhagatgír, a Sanni-
así, was going on a pilgrimage to Hingláj, with a band of disciples,
and visited Bábá Nának's dera on his way. Nának's grandson, Dharm
Cbaad, poured food into the bowl of Bhagatgír, who had asked to be
served first, but it was not filled. A pinch of karáh prasád, however,
given with the words, Sri wáh Gurú, illed the bowl at once. The
visitors kept a vigil before the dera and the goddess Hinglaj appeared
to them, so that the object of their pilgrimage was attained. Bhagatgír
then became Dharm Chand's convert, as did all his followers, ander
the name of Bhagat Bhagwán. The great akhára of the sect is by
the Bibiksar tank at Amritsar, but it also has akháras at Ladda,
Bareily, Magla, Rájgirí, Patna and Bihár, with 370 gaddis in Eastern
India. The Bhagat Bhagwáns wear the jatta or matted hair, with a
chain round the waist, and smear themselves with ashes like Sanniasis.
In their beliefs, and in their rúles as to eating and the like, they follow
Nának's precepts.



UdeDlama.
481
sing that sahib oland Naikka wa tatu
The Sangat Sahib also appears to be a chapter of the Udási order,
thuugh it is not one of the four dhuáns. In Sambat 1697 a son was
born to Binda, an Uppal Khatri of Ambmári in the pargana of Miske
Naur,* between Lahore and Multán. The boy was named Pherú, and
in 1713 he became cook to Gurú Har Rai, who taught him and
invested him with the seli and topi and sent him as a masand to the
Lammá (his native country) and the Nakkát (towards Shahpur), where
he made converts. When Gurú Govind Singh destroyed the masands,
by pouring hot oil on their heads, Sikhs were sent to seize Pherú, but
none dared do so, though he made no resistance. Seizing his own
beard Pherd came of his own accurd to the Gurú who, seeing his
righteousness, gave him half his pagrí and seated him by himself,
promising that his sect should prosper. The Gurú also gave him the
title of Sangat Sahib or 'companion of the Gurú,' and sent him back as
masand to the Lamma and Nakká where he made more converts. In
18961 the Sangat Sahib made a travelling akhára like the Udásís.
One of their most noted disciples, Santokh Dás, worked many miracles,
and became an ascetic. This order is also said to be called Bakhshísh
Sangat Sáhib in Pațiála, where it is said to pay special reverence
to the A'di Granth and to have an akhára of its own, separate from
the four dhuáns. Other accounts say that the Sangat Sáhibia sub-
order was founded by one Bhại Bhalu who was a Ját 'merchant'
of the Málwa or a carpenter of Amritsar. When unregenerate he
was a follower of Saltán Sakhi Sarwar, but was persuaded by Guru
Govind Singh to abandon that cult. A large number of Játs, car.
penters and Lohárs are said to belong to this sub-order. Besides a
Gurudwara in Lahore it holds the Brahmbhút akhára at Amritsar.
Another Udási sub-order is that of the Rámdás Udásís. Its founda-
tion is ascribed to Gurditta (not the eldest son of Sri Chand, but a
grandson of Bábá Bandhá, one of Bábá Nának's converts). Gurditta
was established by Guru Amardeo (? Amardás) on a gaddi at Rámdás,
in the Ajnála tahsil of Amritsar, where there is a ine temple. The
sub-order also has deras at Nawekot, Murádabád and elsewhere.
The Híradásis of our Census returns appear to be either named after
a Mochi who joined the order or after a Bairavi saint of the Muzaffar.
garh district.
Each subdivision of the Udásís has a complete organisation for collect-
ing and spending money, and is presided over by a principal mahant,
called sri mahant, with subordinate mahants under him.
UDE, an agricultural clan found in Shabpur.
UDAÁNA, a Ját tribe found in the Lower Deraját. It affects the Sindhi title
of Jám.
ULAMA, a perfectly miscellaneous assortment of people, many of whom
cannot claim to bave any priestly character. Any divine learned in
the faith of Islám claims the title of Alim, the plural of which is Ulama
or “the learned men." But on the frontier any person who can read.
* A tract not mentioned eslowhere. Naur seems to be a mistake for Maur, near Phál in
Nábha for one version makes Bhái Pheru a Tihún Khatri of that place.
See under Singh. Lamma means simply the West.
| This must have been done before 1896 as in 1891 Maclagan speaks of this peripatetic
akhára as recently established.



482
Umar Khan-Umarxai.
and write and possesses sufficient religious knowledge to enable him to
conduct the devotions in a mosque claims the title. Besides the people
wbó bad returned themselves as Ulama, Bir Denzil Ibbetson incladed
under this heading a large number of persons who had denoted their
caste by some word which expresses nothing more than a certain degree
of religious knowledge or standing among the Muhammadans. T'he
terms so included were Mojawir, Qazi, Mulla, Mulla-Mulwana, Mulána,
Makhdumána, Mián and Mullázadah. Those who returned themselves
as Ulama were almost wholly in the Lahore and Ráwalpindi divisions,
in Gurdaspur and in Gujrát. Mujáwir is the hereditary guardian
of a shrine. Most of those returned were undoubtedly the attendants
of the celebrated shrine of Sakbi Sarwar at Nigáha in Dera Gházi.
Qázi is the Muhammadan law.doctor who gives opinions on all religious
and legal questions. But the descendants of a famous Qázi often
retain the title, and there are several well-known Qázi families. In
Dera Gházi the Qázis are said all to be Awans, and to call themselves
Ulama. The Mulla or Maulvi is a doctor of divinity who teaches the
precepts of the faith. Mulwápa or Mulána appear to be merely other
forms of Mulla; all these people were returned from the Deraját,
Peshawar, and Multán divisions, Makhdúm means the head of a shrine,
generally a descendant of the saint who presides over the management;
and the title used to be almost confined to the heads of the more
celebrated shrines; but it is now used by those of smaller shrines also,
and by any who claim descent from any saint. Makhdúmána is another
form of the same word, or perhaps rather denotes the descendants
of a Makhdúm. In the Derajat Mián means any saint or holy man or
teacher, but is now often used by the descendants of such persons.
Miána has been discussed under Shaikh. Mullázádah is of course
nothing more than the descendant of a Mulla. Under this head of
Ulama should probably be included the Ahkúndzádah and Akbúnd
Khel. Akhánd is a title given to any spiritual chief of renown, and
the descendants of tbese men are known by the above names. Indeed
Colonel Wace said that among the Hazára Pathans any one who had
studied the religious books is called Akhúndzádah or Mulla indiffor-
ently. Lastly, many Pathans return themselves as Akhúnd Khel,
but many of them could not show any claim to the title. They are mostly
Gajars and Awáns, but are slow to admit this, and very often pretend
that they are Sayads. They should not be classed as Mullas or priests,
as they perform no priestly functions. They cultivate land or graze -
cattle like any other Pathans, but cling to the title, as it carries with
it a certain amount of consideration.
To these might be added the Miál, Mufti, Imám, Tálib-ul-ilm, Hakim,
Hátizana, Jildi and Cháwaliána, wbich are properly speaking Dames
denoting professions or titles of respect. The term Ulama is, according
to Sir James Wilson, only adopted pro tempore, and the children of
an Ulama, if ignorant of Arabic and no longer acting as mosque
attendants, revert to the name of the original class.
UMAR Koán, seo under Wazir.
UMARZAI. --The fifth can of the Ahmadzai branch of the Wazir Pațbáns
in Bandu. Its main divisions are Manzai, Tappi, Boza, and a fourth,
Sayyid, which is only now settling dowa in the Marwat plain in any
numbers.
nothing should pais a tite men athe Haz Akhúndelves as They are pretention,



Umchie-Usmánzai.
483
Mably be the cehed only his pagate m
used ontwa
aid to % of Balochy from
UMCHIE, hereditary practisers of the art of medicine who hold plots of
land reut-free, under the name of man-zing or physicians' field' in
Spiti.
UNTWÁL, a purely cccupational term which means nothing more than a
camelman. Shutarbán and Sárbán both have the saine meaning.
Many of the so-called Baloches of the Central Pupjab would pro.
bably be more properly described as Untwál, since the term Baloch
throughout the central districts is used of any Musalmán canelman.
Untwál are returned only from those parts of the Province where
the real meaning of Baloch is properly understood. In those parts
they are said to be all Játs ; out Ját means very little, or rather almost
anything, on the Indus. See also under Othwal.
U PERA, one of the principal muhins or clans of the Kharrals, with its head.
goarters at Jhamra and Dánábád in Montgomery. It obtained a
position on the Rávi about the middle of the 16th century by djs.
possessing the Virks who have always remained its bereditary foea.
Unlike the Kharrals of Kamalia the Operas never withdrew from the
Sandal Bár into which they pushed ap as permanent settlers, in hamlets
of considerable size.
UPPAL, a Hindu Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery and Amrit.
sar: also in Ludhiana where it is said that after a weddiug in this
got the bridegroom cuts the jandián after marriage, and plays with the
twigs. It worships its jathera, Madda by name, and distributes rice
and bread made of 51 sers of flour with alms to Brahmaus.
URMAR, URMUR or Ormue, a tribe, regarding whose origin considerable
doubt exists, wbich is increased by the fact that they have a language
of their own. Moreover their marriage ceremonies, general rites and
customary laws, which differ widely from those of the surrounding
tribes, prove that tbey are not Afgháns. It is now classed as & section of
the Wazie (Mahsud) Pațbáns, see p. 501 infra. Its dialect, called Ormuri
or Bargista, is even more closely related to the Ghalchab languages of
the Pamirs than is Pashto itself. Bargista is the speech of Barak.'
The Ormuri bave an impossible tradition that they came from Yemen,
and that their language was invented for them by a very old aod
learned man Umar Laban some 400 years ago. It is certainly.an East
Iranian tongue. The tribe claims descent from Mir Barak.* The
usual derivation from ur, 'lamp' and mar 'extinguisher'is untenable.
TISETA BÁNI, a Pathán tribe already described on p. 242 supra. Raverty
says they are descendants of the celebrated saiut Muhammad-j-Gísu
Darázm of the long locks '-of Ush near Baghdad, who married a
Shiráni wife. His descendants by her are the Ushtaránis, so-called
from the name of his birth-place. From his other two wives are de-
scended the tribes of Honai, Wardag and Mashwárni.
USMÚNZAI, a Pathán tribe, one of the branches of the Mandanr whose
history has already been described on p. 252 supra.
* This name suggests a connection with the Barakki or BÁBIK Pathans, though Raverty
does not suggest any identity. But he describes the Barakki as a Tájik raco, speaking &
language of their own which is so called after them. He appears to mean Bargishta. The
Pir-i-Roshan lived among the Urmurs of Kániguram and was himself a Tájik, who had
dwalt among the Barakki,



war and hand Peghzai Septribe belonging omániza and San
484
Ustád-Uttra.
Usrád, an artificer in the valley below Chitral, as in the Gilgit and Indus
valleys : see Chitráli.
UTIEKA, & clan, found in Lodhrán tahsil, Multán district. It was already
settled round Dunyápur when the Ain-i-Akbari was compiled.
Utbí, a tribe of Játs, descended from its eponym who settled in the
Málwa. The sons of Buclal (fourth in descent from Uthi) had two sons
Mall and Utar who settled in Siálkoţ. They claim Solar Rájput origin.
Uſowál, a Mohammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Moutgomery.
UTMÁn Khel, a powerful tribe, probably Patháns of the Kodai branch of
the Karlanri, which attached itself to the Yusufzai and Mandaor
when the latter nigrated from their seats on the north-west of the Sulai.
mán Range to the tract round Lund Khwar at the foot of the hills
in the present Pesháwar district. Thence in the 16th century they
occupied their present territory which is a mountainous tract between
the Rúd and Ambhar rivers and thence stretcbes eastwards between
the Swát river and the Peshawar district as far as the Ránizai and Sam
Ránízni borders. A portion of the tribe belonging originally to the
Sánízai, Bimbarzai and Peghzai septs still dwells in the country round
Lund Khwar and has become separated from tbe rest of the tribe.
The Utmán Khel comprise many sopts which are constantly at feud with
one another.
UTMÁNzA1; (1) one of the two main branches of the Wazíe Pathans in
Bapnu. It has two main divisions, the Bakkakhel and Janikhel.
The former has three main sub-divisions, Takhti, Narini and Sardi,
the Takhti, who are numerous and wealthy, being settled in Shawal.
The Jánikhel have also three main sub-divisions, Idia, the most
numerous, Tor and Maliksháhi. The Utmánzai are being gradually
driven from their hill seats by the Mahsuds ; (2) one of the four
branches of the Mandapr Patháns, found in Pesháwar and Hazára. Their
history has already been given at pp. 251 and 252 supra. Utmán, son
of Manno, the son of Mandaur, had two wives: from the 6 rst are de-
scended the A kazai, Kanizai and Alizai, collectively called Utmánzai,
and from the second the Saddozai. The Akazai must not be confused
with the Black Mountain tribe of that pame. In Hazára the Alizai
are called Allázai and are split up into three sections, the Sáid-Kháni,
Khush hál-Kbáni and TARKHEL). Their general rule of inheritance is
per stirpes. The leading families belong to the Sáid kháni section.*
As a whole the tribe is well-behaved and provides the army with
some excellent soldiers.
UTTAMZA18, a Muhammadan Ját clau (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
UTTARÁDHI, a sub-division of tbe Dádupanthi sect, the gurú of which resides
At. Rathia in Hissár,
UTTRA, an agricultural clan found in Shábpur and in the Lower Deraját
where it affects the title of Rádá.
* Hazara Gazetteer, 1907, pp. 24–5.



485
hold Bobber Kharelu
VAIBYA.The third of the four castes, sprung from Brahmá’s thighs. His
profession (vesa) is commerce, attendance on cattle, and agriculture ;
by preference the two former. But he may, in case of need, descend
to the servile arts of a Súdra (Colebrooke's Essays, pp. 271, 276).
Valána, a tribe of Játs who hold Bohumar, a village in Sharakpur thána,
now in Gujranwala, with the Dher Kharrals, and with them have been
proclaimed under the Criminal Tribes Act.
VÁM MÁrgi, a branch of the Sháktiks, i.e. Devi Upásaks, who offer animal
sacrifice to Káli and use both meat and liquor in their ritual. They
worship the female creative principle, hut keep their methods of
worship absolutely seciet. The path, wbich is vám=left or beautiful,
is open to great temptation, and while persons with a high degree of
self-control are said to have attained to great superpatural power
(in the direction of black magic), the novices fall as easily into abuse,
as stated by Maclagan. The sect is, however, losing its popularity.
Interesting tales are told of the doiogs of eminent Vám Márgis.
One of them is said to have rescued 18 prisoners from a well-guarded
jail in a Native State, one disappearing every evening, in spite of all
the extra precautions taken. For this purpose he is said to have
lived for 40 days solely on spirits. Pitchers full of liquor are said
to have got converted into milk, and so on. Within the last balf
century, casos are said to have occurred in which buman sacrifice
was practised, and a man who had tried to pry into the secrets of the
worship of a group of Van Márgis was seized, sacrified at the altar
of the goddess, cut to pieces, cooked, and eaten up, without anybody
being the wiser. Suspicion led to the arrest of some of the mombors
and the search of the house, but no evidence could be procured by
the Police. Punjab Census Rep., 1912, § 181.
VAIDEHA (Sanskr.), a caste whose progeoitor was 'begotton by a Vaisya
on a Brahmani. Its occupation was waiting on women: Colebrooke's
Essays, p. 274. Ibbetson suggested that it corresponded to the modern
Dára. But Pandit Hari Kishen Kaul identifies it with the Badhyá
sub-caste of the Mírásis. According to the Smritis, it was a caste of
actors and artizans.
VARAICH.-One of the largest Ját tribes in the Punjab. In Akbar's time
it held two-thirds of Gujrat though on leos favourable terms than
those allowed to the Gújars who held the remainder ; and it still holds
170 villages in that district. They have also crossed the Chenab into
Gujranwala where they held a tract of 41 villages,* and have apread
along under the hills' as far as Ludhiana and Máler Kotla. They do
* These 41 villages lie in a cluster in Gujranwala tahsil. In this District too the Waraich
or Varaich, as the namo is also spelt, claim to be Solar Rájputs desconded from their
oponym. His father Mutta came from Ghazni and settled in Gujrát, Nine generatione
later Dovi Dás crossed the Chenáb and founded Targa in Gujranwala, round which village
the tribe spread rapidly. Inheritance in Gujranwala is by pagvand, but adoption anda
the usual restrictions' is common. Bare Khán Waraich was a notad rebel but sub.
mitted to Ranjit Singh.



486
The Varaich.
Sürajbhird accounty of K
not always even pretend to be Rájputs, but say that their ancestor
Dhúdi was a Ját who came into India with Mahaad Ghaznavi and
settled in Gujrát, where the tribe grew powerful and partly dispossessed
the original Gújar lords of the soil. Another story is that their
ancestor was a Sárajbansi Rajput who came from Ghazni to Gujrát;
while according to a third account their ancestor was a descendant of
Rája Karan who went from the city of Kisrah to Delhi and was settled
by Jalál-ud-din Fíroz Sháh in Hissár, whence the tribe moved some
five centuries ago to Gujranwala. But there is little doubt that Gujrát
was their first home, and that their movement has been eastwards.*
The Wazirábád family of this tribe rose to importance under the Sikhs,
and its history is narrated by Sir Lepel Griffin at pages 409 ff of his
Punjab Chiefs. They are alınost all Musalmáns, but retain all their
tribal and many of their Hindu customs. They marry with the best
local tribes. They appear to be known as Chúng or V araich in-
differently in Lahore. The name suggests a connection with tbe
Pathán tribe of Badech..
In Gurdaspur the Játs who have einbraced Islám have a considerable
reputation as spiritual leaders, and the well-known shrine of Jhangi
Bakht Shah Jamál, about 4 miles from Dera Nának, is held by men
of this tribe. In Siálkot the Waraich observe the usual Ját, customs
at marriage-with variations. Sweetened flourt and loavest are
prepared and the bridegroom goes to a jand tree with the females of
his fainily. The Mírási there cuts a ram's ear and marks the foreheads
of all present with its blood. A thread, coloured red and yellow, is
tied to a branch of the tree and the boy cats off a twig from it with a
sword, doing obeisance. The Mírási takes the ram home, ani he, the
Brahman and the barber get 4 annas each-other menials only getting
half that sum. The flour and brean are distributed so that married
men and betrothed boys get 13 loaves each while bachelors only get 3
loaves apiece. Then, comes the máyán, at which boiled wheat is
distributed among the brotherhood, oil is rubbed on the boy's head and
the gáná tied. The lágis now get the vails mentioned above. The boy
then performs the khará rite by breaking earthen pots. He next dops
a sehrú or chaplet made of flowers of the ravel (a kind of white jasmine,
the rai-bel) and a new dress. The tambol is collected, offerings made,
and the wedding procession makes ready.
In the Shakargarh tahsil of Gurdáspur there is said to be a group
of criminal Varaich, apparently of ihe same stock as the criminal
Boras of the Jammu hills and the Pakbiwára of Sialkot.
* But & Gujrát account declares that Rája Karan who lived in Hissár, in the time of Firoz
Shah, had five sons and that they cleaned land. The eldest was Daurai --- from whom descend.
ed Jeta, who sided with Tímár, and he defeated Jaipál !! So he got the title of Raí with a
grant of land and embraced Islam. The Waraich are returned as an agricultural Ját
clan from Montgomery, Multán and Shanpur.
+ Sira.
Nanda.
& Mauli.



487
WABÁH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WACHHAL, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WADA), a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WADÁLÁ, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WADHAL, an agricultural clan found in Sháhpur. It is described as an
Awán sept in Siálkot.
WADHAN, an agricultural clan found ia Shahpur.
WADHRÁ, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
Wadowá, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Wapwál, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
WAG, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WAGAN, a Mubammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery and
Multán.
WAGAą, a Ját clen (agricultural) found in Multán.
Wagh, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Wágo, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Wáchá, a small tribe which used to graze in the Central Bár under the
Kharrals, but unable to meet their exactions it established itself in the
Wirk country and thence raided the Bhattis. Aided by the Kharrals
of Jhumra the Wághas forced the Bhattis back to the Rávi and were
left in undisturbed possession of the Gujranwala Bar and were the
leading Janglis of its northern end. .
Waguá, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
WAGHMAL, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WAGHŘÁ, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur, and, as an Aráiņ clan
(agricultural), in Montgomery.
Wági, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WÁHAL, & Ját clau (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Wanála, a tribe of Játs found in Siálkoţ and like the Kangs descended
from Jograh, through its eponym.
Warándí, a Ját clas (agricultural) found in Multan.
WÁHQAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
WÁBLAB, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Auritsar and Mullán.
WahníWAL (BAHNIWAL, q. v.), a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán, and
under the name of Wahniwal-Bhattí, as a Rájput clan (agrioultural) in
Montgomery, where they hold with the Baghelas the country immedi.
ately round Kamália on the right bank of the Rávi. One of their
ancestors is said to have been born in a depression in the ground-
wáhan. In appearance and habits thev do not differ from other Ját.



488
Wahroka-Wajoka.
19
tribes of the District. They do not seem to claim any connection with
the Bahniwal of Hissár. Though small in numbers they are second to
none in audacity and love of robbery.
W SAROKA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Wáəti, a common term in Sirmúr for BAHTI.
WAHÚJAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WAITA, Vena, a tribe found mainly in the kárdári of Sádiqabad and the
Allahábád peshkári in Bahawalpur. They trace their origin to Jaisal.
mir and aver that in the 4th century of the Hijra the Raja of that
State gare Harar, the modern Tajgadh, in dower to his daughter
Húrán, and that the place was named after her. - At the close of the
4th century Sayad Ahmad Bilauri took up his abode at a place now
called Amingadh close to Horar which was then ruled by Raja Bhunak
Bháția who became a convert to Islám. The Vehas' folk-etymologies
point to a change in their naine on conversion for one derives Veba from
vih, '20, twenty leading members of the tribe having been converted
with Rája Bhunak. Another derives the name from wahi (cultivation)
because the Rája of Jaisalmir confiscated their lands on their conversion,
and the Sayad told them to take to coltivation. A third fanciful
etymology derives Vehạ from wáh, because their conversion was ap.
plauded by the Sayad's followers. The Vehas of Bahawalpur inter.
marry with those of Dera Ismail Khan and the Tulamba ilága of
Multán.
Wains, (1) a Ját clan (agricultural, found in Amritsar, Montgomery and
Shahpur. In the Multán and Shujábád tabsils of Mulián, it claims to
be Hajua (? Janjua) Rájpals from Sakesar whose eponym settled in
Multán under Firoz Shah. In Siálkot, too, it claims Hajua* Rájput
ancestry and says its fouoder, Wains, came to the Punjab in company
with Firoz Shah. Another Siálkot tradition makes Wais one of the
22 sons of Sanpal from whose two brothers, Ranpál and Harpál, are
descended the Hajauli Rajputs ; (2) a Mabtam clan (agricultural) found
in Montgomery.
The Wains of Amritsar are clearly identical with the Bains. It has
been suggested that the name is connected with bhains "buffalo,' but
is much more likely to be the Sanskr. VAISYA, Panj. Bais or Baish, the
third Hindu caste.
WAIRAR, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WAIRSI, a branch of the Gils which affects Rájá Pir, whose shrine is an
Rajiána in the Moga tahsil of Ferozepur: Cf. p. 300 of Vol. II.
WAJAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WAJBA, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WAJLA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WAJOKA, an agricultural clan found in Shábpur.
* There does not appear to be any such tribe as the Hajua, but the name appears in the
Multán Gazetteer, 1901-02, p. 136, and in the History of Sialkot, p. 29. In the latter District,
there is a Bajwá Ját tribe, and a RAJWÁ Ját clan appears to exist. But the Hajua must be
extinct and the Rajwá nearly so.



486
489
Wájwarah-Wasir.
WÁJWARAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WALANA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
WÁLAR, a Ját clan (agrioulta ral) found in Amritsar.
Walaskí, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WALLA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur.
WALLERAI, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WALLOWÁNA, an agricultural clan found in Shahpur,
WÁLOT, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WAMAK, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WANAIK, a Muhaz.madan and Hindu Kamboh clan (agricultural) found in
Montgomery. The name is possibly derived from Vinnaiyaka.
WANDA, a Hindu Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Wandar, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WangaÁYA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WANGRÍQAR or Bangera, the synonym for Chúrigar iu the western Punjab.
WANJO, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WÁNWAR, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WÁBAH, a Ját clan (agricultaral) found in Multán.
WARAH, a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WÁRan, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WARBAÚ, a Muhammadan Ját clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
WARDAG.-- See under Takhti.
WARHE, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
WARK, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar ; probably=Wirk.
WARPÁL, an Aráín clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
WARWAL, a Mahtam clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery,
WARYA, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Maltán.
WABYÁ), a Rájput clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
WABYá, an Aráin clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
WABYAH, a Mahtam. clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WARYE, & Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Wasír, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Mailsi tahsil, Maltan district, and
as a small tribe in the Sandal Bar (Lyallpur district), where they
wore dependents of the Wághas, though of superior origin to them, and



490
The Wasirs.
Kala whes pattain. Their come into the
She is the first to 90: Kalo ade Forakhain
had a similar history. They now occupy a namber of villages jointly
with the Wágbas. Sir Edward Maclagan writes of them :-
"The Wasírs are Púņwárs. They are said to have come into the
Sandal Bár from. Kot Kabála beyond Pákpattan. Their arrival was
fairly recent, as it dates from Kálú who fled from Farrukhsiyar, the
Mughal emperor, some 12 generations ago : Kalá advanood to the Raví,
and his successor Sama was the first to enter the Bár, 8 gonorations ago.
The Wasírs had to fight the Bhagsins on the west and the Baloch and
Sipra on the east during Ranjit Singh's time. They are called Wasírs
after the first of the race who was converted to Islám, by Hazrat
Sháh, Cháwali Mashaikh. The following is their genealogy :-
Pupwar.
Mulráj.
Kui.
Karan.
Kamdoo.
Dhahdi.
Wien.
Sochra.
Lil Kuman.
Tijar.
Wasir.
Dhirath.
Barapal.
Sadan.
Banse.
Bikan.
Tolla.
Aima.
Sarab.
Kálú.
The Wasirs live in the south of the Háfizábad tahsil and are more or
less onited. They are classed as Játs : as to marriage I was told once
that they marry among themselves, only rarely marrying with the
Bhattis ; and another time that they take wives from any tribe and give
daughters to the Bhattis only." The following is a Wasír ballad :-
Jot Singhi ke Manipale ;
Whose flame is as Mazipál Rája's,
Kálú tegh vaddhai Mírá!
Kalu drew tho sword, O Chief!
Poire amal Shahid de !
O descendants of martyrs !
Kutba wa muhar Wastrá,
Tho khutbu and seal belong to the Wasirs,
Tusi Chaddraro Bilocho nu kuttu lad ditte, You have upset the Chaddrars and Bi.
loches,
Wa karde ho bhirá.
And have soattered the hosts.
Tuhánú fatteh nit kadim di.
You have victory from of old,
Vand khánde ho núr faqiron.
You are liberal to Mirásis and faqirs.
Kot Kabúle bhon dáws,
Kot Kabúla claims the world,
Chattar chure, bhondówi.
With umbrella uplifted, claims the world.
Kaun tráda på de asi,
Who can claim equality with you,
Chartar chare, musallam pávo.
May your umbrellas be uplifted, may you
claim the victory.
Nau nadáin Pir Cháwali.
The Pir Chawali is like nine streams,
Terah Jajje-ra.
(He converted) thirtean Jajjeras (a Khar.
ral tribe).



491
Vi'ásiwán-Waffu.
WÁsiwán, a class of refugees and immigrants including the Mahtams,
mostly tenants and rarely landowners and not dissimilar in origin to
the class of that name among the Afghán tribes. The Wasiwán appear
to be found only in Montgomery and among the Patháns the term
would seem to be obsolete.*
Wasli, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán. Waslí Bhattí, a Rajput
clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WÁTAL.-A nomad and somewhat criminal tribe found in Siálkot where
they are described as sieve-makers, professing Islám and refraining
from pork. They can eat, drink or smoke with Chuhņas, but the latter
hesitate to smoke with them. The Wátals are the gipsies of Kashmir
where they have two groups, one Muhammadanised, the other out-
caste. t
WAȚÁRAH, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WATO, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
Watrozaí, a Pathán clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Watto, one of the Rájput tribes of the Sutlej. They are a Bhatti clan, of
whose origin the Bissár story has been given at p. 102, Vol. II, supra.
The Sirsa tradition appears to be that one Rája Júnhar, a descendant
of the Bhatti Rája Salvá han of Sialkot, was settled in Bhatner, where
he had two sons Achal and Batera. From the latter sprang the Sidhu
and Barár Játs. The former again had two sons Jaipal and Rájpál,
of whom Jaipal was the ancestor of the Bhaçţi proper, and Rájpal of
the Wațţu.f The Waçţu date their conversion to Islám by Bába Farid,
from the time of Khíwa who ruled at Haveli in Montgomery, and was
succeeded by the famous Wațţu chief, Lakhe Khán. They hold both
banks of the Sutlej in the Sirsa district, and the adjoining parts of
Montgomery and Bahawalpur, from Baggehi 16 miles above Fázilka,
to Phulahi 70 miles below it. Above them lie the Dogars, below them
the Joiya. They are said to have crossed from the right bank of the
river and spread into the then almost uninhabited prairies of Sirsa only
some five generations ago, when Fázil Dalel Rána came from Jhang
near Haveli and settled the unoccupied riverain. There is also a small
section of them on the Rávi in the Montgomery district. It is not
impossible that some of the Wațţu have returned themselves as Bhatti
simply, for some few have returned themselves under both heads. The
tribe was formerly almost purely pastoral, and as turbulent and as
great marauders as other pastoral tribes of the neighbourhood; and
the habits of the Rávi Waţțu, who gave trouble in 1857, have hardly
changed. But the Sutlej Wațţu who possess but little jungle have
taken very generally to agriculture, and Captain Elphinstone says
that "some of their Astates are well cultivated, their herds have
* Montgomery Gazetteer, 1898-9, p. 79.
† Lawrence, The Valley of Kashmir, pp. 315-6, gives a full account of the tribe.
| Another Hissar tradition says that the Wattu are descended from Rájpá), son of
Janrá, son of Dasal son of Rája Rasálu, a descendant of Bhatti, (see under Lakhiwal).
Rájpal had two brothers, Chano progenitor of the Mai Rájputs and Dham, ancestor of the
Nawabs of Rania. Janrá founded Abohar which he named after his wifo Abho,



492
The Watļus.
“ diminished, and many of them cannot now be distinguished in appear.
“ance from peaceful Araiņs or Khokhars. The change in their habits
“bas indeed been remarkable, as they still speak with exultation of the
“ Kárdárs they used to kill during the Sikh rule and the years in which
" they paid po revenue because the Sikhs were unable or afraid to collect
“it." Mr. Purser described the Wațţu as “priding themselves upon
“ their politeness and hospitality. They are of only moderate industry,
“profuse in expenditure on special occasions, indifferent to education
"and exceedingly fond of cattle.” He classes them however with the
Kátbia, Kharral, Sial, Bahníwál, Baloch and Joiya as “ essentially
“ robber tribes and more or less addicted to cattle-stealing." This
doubtless simply means that these are the dominant tribes of the tract,
who look upon a pastoral as higher than an agricultural life.
Another account makes them descendants of Sálváhan's son Pítal, who
quarrelled with his brothers and went to Bhatper. Twelve generations
later Adhan, owing to a feud with the Punwárs, immigrated into the
Punjab and earned his title of Wațțú* by subduing the pride of
that race.
The Wațţus have a number of septs (muhins), e.g. Ládhoká, Bázídká,
Salim-Sháh-ká, etc., etc., all named after ancestors; Sándar, Mujahid,
Mání, Govar, Sadhár Adli, Amli Multádi, Mahmún, etc. Marriage is, if
possible, effected with a collateral after full enquiry into the physical
fitness of each party. Occasionally Waţtus give daughters to Bodlás,
but tbe practice is said to be reprobated. They are also said to take
them from the Kharrals, Sials, Sakhira, Hijra, Mahár and Kamyá, but
not to give them in returo.
In Bahawalpur the Wațţus, according to their own traditions, came
origipally from Jaisalmir and settled in the Punjab, advancing as far
as Batala (or Wațála) which they founded. They then dispersed
along both banks of the Satlej. Their conversion to Islám was effect-
ed in the reign of Firoz Shah Tughlak after which period they were
subjects of the kingdom of Delhi, and suffered greatly at the hands
of the Sidhu-Barár Sikhs to whom they remained tributary until
Nawab Muhammad Babáwal Khán II expelled the Sidhu-Barárs from
the Waţtu territory and annexed it to Baháwalpur. The control of
the State over the Waţgus was however ineffective, and Hindu Kárdárs
appointed to the charge of their territory were often, as the Wattus
boasted, assassinated, until Miran Imam Shah, Kárdár, brought the tribe
under subjection by applying the Muhammadan penal code, as for ex.
ample by inflicting amputation of the hands for theft.t
The Waţtu mirásis carry their genealogy back to Wațţu, 8th in
descent fror Jaisal, the founder of Jaisalmer and 26th in descent
from Rája Risálú. These mirásis also preserve a version of the Legend
of Rája Risálú identical with that given in Templo's Legends of the
Punjab, but they localize Risálú's capital at Sábúke in the Mailsi
tahsil of Multán opposite the village of Rája Sháh in Baháwalpur,
* From vat, rancour. But wațț or vat has various meanings, and Wattá very likely
means borderer. Cl. Panj. Dicty., p. 1203.
One Koora Ohhina whose hands had been thas amputated lived to a great age and died
only 15 years ago,



The Wazir Pātháns.
493
and in 1894 the Sutlej eroded some land near Sáhúke and disclosed
& platform beneath which a number of skulls are said to have been
found, thus confirming the popular belief that Sáhúke was Risala's
capital. The Waţtu genealogy is given below :--
JAUNHAR.
Uchchir of Ichchur.
The Bhattis.
The Sidhú-Barárs.
Raj Pál.
Wattu.
Barham.
Sahdhur.
Laur.
Anakh Pál,
Meh Pál.
Wes Ráj.
Báhú.
Rúp Chand.
Chakko, who first
embraced Islam;
Khiwa.
founder of the
Chakko-ka sept.
Randhir, from whom Gaddho, founder
descend the Bahrám-ká of the Gaddho-ká
and Rahmun.ks septs.
sept.
The principal septs of the Wațţús in Baháwalpur are-
. Sklim-ke (1) Qaim-ke, (2) Amrúko, (3) Báre-ke.
ii. Sáhrú, with a sub.sept Darweshke.
iii. Gaddhoke, (1) Ratte-ke, (2) Báthe-ke, (3) Dhaddi-ke, (4) Daddú-ke.
iv. Rahmún.ke with several eponymous sub-septs.
v. Malle-ke wa so
vi. Miána.
im. Shekhú-ke.
xii. Kálúke.
vii. Jassoke.
a. Chakkoke.
æiii. Dhírúke.
viii. Abloke.
ei. Dalelke.
xiv, Sahnke.
The Waţtús have several strongly marked characteristics. Divorce
is unknown among them, women of loose character being killed and
declared to have absconded. It is considered foolish to talk of divorce.
A widow or daughter inherits no share in her husband or father's
property but receives maintenance only. - A price is never accepted for
å daughter, but a Wattu has often to pay Rs. 200-500 for a wife.
The Wattús only give daughters in marriage to Sayyids and Joiyas,
but they take brides from the first five septs of the Túhars, and from
Chauhans, Chhívás and Bhattis. Like the Joiyas they have no custom
of adoption.
Wazie, a Pathán tribe, divided into two main branches, the Mabsúd and
Darvesh Khel Wazírs.
The whole of the Bannu portion beyond our border is occupied by
the Darvesh Khel Wazír, while south of them, along the Dera Ismail



494
Darwesh Khel Wazírs.
Khán border, behind the Bitanni country, and as far south as the
Gomal pass, lie the Mahsúd clan of the same tribe. The Wazír are
descended from Sulaimán, son of Kakai, and are one of the Karlánri
tribes. The original seat of the tribe was in the Birmil hills, west
of the Khost range which separates them from their kinsmen the
Bannúcbi descendants of Shitak. Sulaimán had two sons, Lálai and
Khizrai. Lálai had to fly by reason of a blood fead, and settled in
Ningrahár on the northern slopes of the western Safed Koh, where
his descendants the Lalai Wazir are still settled between Jalálábád
and Párachinár. Khizrai had three sons, Músa, Mahsád and Gurbuz.
From Mahsúd are descended the Mahsúd Wazir, divided into the
Alizai and Bahlolzai while from Músa Darvesh are descended the
Utmánzai and Ahmadzai clans, usually joined under the title of Darvesh
Khel Waziri.
About the close of the 14th century the Wazír began to move east-
wards. They first crossed the Khost range and drove tha Banduchi out
of Shawal, and occupied the hills of the Banna and Kohát border
north of the Tochi. Then crossing that river, they drove the Urmur
Afgháns, descendants of Urmur, son of Sharkabún and near kins-
men of the Abdáli, out of the hills south of the Tochi on the lower
Bannu and Tánk borders to take refuge in the Logar valley near Kábul
and dislodging the Bitanoi from Káníguram, drove them back beyond
Garangi to the low hills on our immediate frontier. They thus obtained
possession of-all that confused system of mountains, which, starting from
the Gomal pass which marks tbe northern extremity of the Sulemáns
proper, runs northwards along our border to Thal and the Kurram river,
where it joins the lower ranges of the Safed Koh. Their two main
sections are the Mahsúd and Darvesh Khel, the former holding the
hills to the south, and the latter those to the north of the Tochi river
and the Kasor pass; while of the Darvesh Khel country, the Ahmadzai
occupy the southern and the Utmánzai the northern parts. The Hasan
Khel, an important Utinánzai sopt, hold the extreme north-western
portion of the tract. The two great sections are practically independent
tribes, owning no common head, and with but little common feeling.
They still nominally hold the Birmil country, though the Sulimán Khel
and Kharoti Gbílzai winter there with their flocks, and during their
stay the Wazírí are confined to their walled villages. They were till
lately wholly nomad and pastoral; but they have of late years encroach-
ed upon the plain country of the Marwat, Bannúchi, and Khatak, and
now hold cultivated lands in Bannu and Kohắt.
I.-Tap DABWESH KHEL Wazíks.
The tradition about the origin of the Darwesh Khel Wazírs is that one
Abdullah, who lived in the country now occupied by the Mahsúds, was
chief of the tribe, called Urmur, but had no son. One day he went towards
the Wáda plain, where a king's army had been in camp. On the
morning after the king's forces had left, Abdullah found a baby,
hidden under & frying-pan-io Pashtu karerai-aod took it home. This
boy grew up, married a girl of the Ormur tribe and by her had a
son called Sulaiman, who in turn had a sou called Wazír, the repated
ancestor of the Wazir tribe.
ribes til og Grundlage contained
but that is



Darwesh Kkel Wazirs.
495
Khidrai the second son of Wazír begat three sons, Múga, Ma'sud and
Mubárik. Músa was a religious man so they nicknamed him Darwesh
(faqir) and from him descend this, the biggest section of the Wazírs. He
died in the hills near Khwaja Khidar where the boundary pillars of
Northern and Southern Wazíristán now stand.
From Ma’súd the second son of Khidrai descend the Mahsúd Wazírg.
Some say that the Mahsúds were originally Hazáras, but they do not
appear to have, as a body, the Mongolian type of features common
among the Hazára.
The third son, Mubárik, had a son named Gurbuz from whom descend
the Gurbuz tribe-most of whom now live in the hills between Khost
and the Tochi valley above Míramsháh.
Thus it will be seen that the Wazírs are divided into three great clans
Darwesh, Mahsud and Gurbuz.
When the Darwesh Khel Wazírs began to multiply they found their
own country in the neighbourhood of Shawál too small and moved
down towards the plains. During their march they fought with
numerous tribes who gave way before them and left the country in their
hands ; one Wazír facetiously told Mr. J. Donald that they had really
acquired most of the lands by mortgage, as the original owners
could not repay the loans advanced. There may be some truth in this
story but probably force had more to say to it.
Wana was conquered from the Násirs, Dotannis and Miánis: Spin,
from the Dotannis and Násirs: Razmak, from the Urmurs: the Upper
Tochi, from the Marwats: the Kaitu valley from the Landar and
Sadak : the Kurram valley from the Bangash and Orakzai: the Saro
plain, from the Bangash and Zaimusht: Gomatti was received as a gift
from a Badnúchi of Soráni: Warghar of the Wali Khels, from the
Marwats: Sadrawan of the Sperkais, from the Bannúchis - the Hathi
Khel thal, from the Marwats and Kbattaks : and the Birmal valley,
from the Marwats, Mangals and Zadrans.
Thus the Darwesh Khel Wazírs carved out for themselves a separate
territory of their own. The Mahsúd seized the country which had
belonged to the Urmurs, who fled towards Afghánistán, the upper hills
above Ningrahár and Pesháwar.
The country of the Darwesh Khel and Mahsúd Wazirs thus got the
name of Wazíristán, “the land of the Wazírs." It is bounded on the
north by the Turi country and the Khost valley, on the west by the
Kharoti country and on the east by the British Districts of Dera Ismail
Khán, Bandu and Kohát and on the south by the Gumal valley. Its
area is about 6,500 square miles which is not only larger than any one
District in the North-West Frontier Province, but equal to nearly half
its whole settled area. The Darwesh Khels divided this large tract
amongst the different sections, the two main ones being the Ahmadzai
and Utmánzai. Some sub-sections of the Ahmadzai live in the north-
western corner of Bannu and in the hills round Gumatti on the Saro
plain and Zarwan and the junction of the Kurram and Kaitu rivers,
Wána, Spín, the Dhana valley, Shakai and Badar. The Utmánzai live
towards the south-west corner of Baunu, and also in the Kurram valley,
on the Kaitu, in the Tochi and Khaisora valleys, Sham, Shawal and the



908
Darwesh Khel Wazirs.
Birmal valley. The ancestors of the Darwesh Khel divided the country
among the sub-sections, either according to the numerical strength of
each or on ancestral shares, and that distribution still holds good.
Having sub-divided their newly acquired country, the Darwesh Khels
settled down in it and began to prosper. Increasing in numbers they
became a powerful fighting race, but with prosperity dissensions crept in
among them over grazing questions and these led to bloodshed and
blood-feuds. There were also quarrels over women so the Wazir elders
convened a council at which they drew up rules for tha settlement of
feuds and disputes. These were accepted by the tribesmen about 400
years ago when the ceremony of dua khair (holding up the hands in
prayer) was gone through. These rules are a inixture of Mubammadan
law and custom and are as follows:-'Life for life': As & rulo
the life of the actual taker of life is forfeit, but the taking of revenge
may extend to the agnates of the killer. In some cases blood-woney
is taken at the rate of Rs. 1,200 Kábuli for a Pathan and Rs. 360 Kábuli
for a dependent.
The procedure in effecting neki (peace) is this:-The relatives of the
offender with tribal leaders and mulláhs come to the house of the injur-
od party by way of intercession (ninawatli) and offer to make peace
on payment of Rs. 1,200 Kábuli, if a Pathán Pashtún has been killed.
But, it should be remembered, if tbe injured party is strong the neki or
reparation money is often not accepted, and a life is taken. Cases
have occurred in which Wazírs have taken life even after blood-money
had been awarded. This Rs. 1,200 is not all paid in cash, it is paid half
in cash and half in laod or cattle and two virgins are also given, thus:--
Rs. 600 cash..
» 300 in land or cattle.
„ 300 by delivery of two girls.
This system is called nime reke nime peke.
It will be seen that the laws about evidence are very lax among
Wazírs : for instance, if a man is killed in the dark and the murderer
is not identified the deceased's relatives will try to trace him, and in
case their suspicions fall on any one he will be required to produce 100
men to take an oath as to his innocence. If he cannot produce 100,
ten will be required to take oath ten times each to make up the 100.
This simple rule may have answered a century ago, but it does not seem
to answer now, for a Wazír will take a false oath readily if it suits him
to do so, and his regard for the Qurán is not what it was or may have
been. Ió a case of outraging the modesty of a woman the offender
has to submit to have a bit of his foot cut off and sometimes his nose
has to go too. Should he plead not guilty the tribunal of elders is
guided by the word of the woman, but fortunately such cases do not
appear to be very common. .
The following appears to be the system by which trade is protected
among the Wazírs, who go in for commerce in spite of their raiding pro-
pensities, and this can be seen at any Friday Fair in Bannu from the
number of Wazír traders. Should a Wazir convoy be attacked
and property looted by a raiding party, by tribal law the party raided
is justified in killing the cattle of the raiders who are held jointly and
severally respuosible for the raid. Sometimes peace is made by giving



Darwesh Khel Wazirs.
497
18 women to the persons raided : of these 9 women must be alive at the
time, while the remaining 9 are given when they come into existenice.
If an animal is poisoned and dies the owner is entitled to kill an
animal of equal value belonging to the offender unless compensation
is paid. If a fruit tree is cut or injured the compensation is Rs. 100
per tree. If a house is set on fire (a kezhdi* is also regarded as a
house) the compensation is Rs. 100 and the price of any property
burnt in the house is payable in addition to this sum. If any life is
lost the murder rules apply, but in such a case before deciding that
murder has been committed, it will have to be enquired first whether
the man at fault knew that the house he was going to set on fire was
the abode of any persons or that they were sleeping there when the
offence was committed.
The rules about refugees are very strict and a Wazír will suffer a
lot for his hamsáya or refugee. Cases in which a refugee has been
given up by the Wazírs are very rare. A man becomes a hamsáya by
going with a sheep which he kills before the man whom he seeks as
bis overlord. According to custom the person approached cannot very
well refuse the sheep, which he and his companions eat, and thereafter
they are bound to protect the hansáya at considerable risk to them.
selves. To some extent tbis custom prevails in British Districts and it
gives trouble in the trial of cases because influential men are urged
to intercede for criminals.
The customs about affairs of the heart among Wazírs are peculiar...
All Patháps punish with death the unfaithful wife and her paramour if
caught flagrante delicto. But according to the Wazír code of honour,
it is wrong even to imagine oneself in love with another man's wife.
For indulging even in such amorous imaginings one is liable to have
a foot cut off. The Wazír code also provides for the woman's protec-
tion for if a man kills a woman without killing the man with whom
her name has been coupled, her relations can injure the man who
killed her unless he pays Rs. 600. Kábuli as compensation to her
relations. A husband if he likes can take Rs. 1,200 and renounce all
claims to his wife. If there is any difficulty about paying compensation
the decree-holder has a right to seize the debtor's property or that
of his relations, and in this he is supported by the tribe who would
combine to punish any resistance on the debtor's part.
When a Wazír dies his relatives and friends, both male and female,
beat their chests, and people of the neighbouring villages come and
condole. The body is washed and prepared for the coffin by mulláhs,
and praytrs are said over it. When the funeral party returns from
the graveyard relatives and friends are entertained at a feast by men
of a different section of the tribe, - Marriages are performed with due
pomp and ceremony. The betrothal is arrariged by the parents of the
contracting parties, and the bridogroom has to pay a dowry to the
bride's family, in other words wives are bought. The actual marriage
ceremony is a quiet and simple function, but a fortnight or three weeks
before the date tixed a procession goes from the bridegroom's house
to the bride's. It will consist of five score or ten score young men
and half a hundred women with two or three tomtoms which are
* Huto



498
Darwesh Khel pedigree.
vigorously beaten, 'The women sing songs, the men clash sword and
buckler, others fire off their match-locks. With them they take two or
three sheep, a bullock and some rice. The night is spent in feasting
at the bride's house and on the morrow the procession returns with
the same noisy pomp, taking with them the bride mounted on a mare.
The interveping period before marriage is to enable the husband's
family to become acquainted with the bride, and to see how they get
on together. If their disagreements are more than the ordinary
family jars, the wedding does not take place.
Not so very long ago the Darwesh Khels were constantly fighting
with the Mahsúds and every year a tora or expedition was arranged
against them, but the Darwesh Khel never met with any great success.
In 1901 or 1902 the Darwesh Khel raised a big force against the
Mahsúds and attacked them from the direction of Spin and Wana, as
well as from Razmak, but they were beaten off by the Mahsáds with
heavy loss. Both sides lost indeed heavily but the Darwesh Khel camo
off second best. They bave been very much broken up partly owing
to the British advance to Wána and the Tochi and partly owing to
disunion in the tribe itself, For instance the powerful Háthi Khel section
which used to move up to Shawál has now ceased to migrate and passes
the summer in the arid tracts near Latammar. The Mahsúds continue
to live compactly in their mountain fastnesses and have annexed some
of the Darwesh Khel lands which immediately adjoined their country.
The Abmadzai sub-sections are :-
Hathi Khel.
Sperkaí.
Khonia Khel. Painda Khel.
Sarki Bhel..
Mohamdad Kbel. 1 Bodin Khel. Taji Khel.
Umarzai.
Khojal Khel. Bizan Khel. Zalli Rhel and Gangi
Khel.
They are said to be thus descended :-
Ahmad.
Husain.
Kálu.
Sperkai.
Nasrai.
Shadi.
Bomi (? Bábami).
Shaikh Bázíd. Utmán.
Khái. J. Kama Dia.
Kaka
.
Namar. Ghani. Dari. Yakub.
Ashraf.
Abid.
Matak.
Rakha.
Rahmat. Ináyat. Barak. Gulándík.



Wazir marriage.
499
But, as pointed out by Mr. F. W. Johnstor, the further one goes
back the more regalar do the names appear. Now the Wazír not
only have some curious non.Muhammadan panies, such as Spezhmai,
(born) when there is a moon; Trezhmai, born when there is no moon:
Chit, a small yellow bird ; Spíngul, 'white-flower'; Práng, 'leopard'
and other local names of birds and beasts, but they have an avor.
mous choice of Masalmán names and one would expect to find pames
of both types in the earlier pedigrees.
The Shaikh Bázíd of this table looks like Báyazíd the Rosbania.
And those of the Utmanzai* :-
Mohmit Khel.
Madda Khel.
Kabul Khel.
Manzar Khel.
Tori Khel.
Bakka Khel and Jani Khel.
The Utmanzais reside only in the centre of Wazíristán, the northern
and southern parts of the country being held by the Ahmadzais who
fought for years to maintain their supremacy.
Among the Ahmadzai the Zalli Khel and Hathi Khel were regarded
as good fighting tribes and among the Utmánzai, the Tori Khel were
foremost ; while the Saifali sub-section of the Kabul Khels were also
famous for their bravery in the field. The Hassan Khel sub-section of
the Mohmit Khel are also regarded as a good fighting clan.
In order to get the tribesmen together there existed a system which
might be called the chalweshta system. According to this each
leader of a clan had the tribal sanction to order in the clansmen, and
each clansman was bound to obey under penalty of baving his sheep
looted or even his tent burnt. In this way & fairly large force was got
together, but as it is impossible under a settled government to allow
the chalweshti system, the Darwesh Khel are gradually becoming
more luxurious in their habits and are settling down in mud huts
which are taking the place of the black tents. They are in fact
passing from the nomadic to the agricultural stage.
Wazir Marriage Customs.
When a man's son is growing up he seeks a family which has a
marriageable daughter-frequently visiting other Wazír families in
his search. Having found a suitable girl be deputes a friend to
ascertain from her parents if they are willing to enter into the alliance
(called dosti, i. e. friendship). If they acquiesce the boy's father with
6 or 7 men visits the house of the girl's fatber or guardian to settle the
bride-price, which varies from Rs. 100 to Rs. 300 and is invariably
exacted. Part of the price is paid down, the rest being payable at the
ents if
If they are ther or gue and is he at th
* Said to be thus descended :-
Utmánzai.
Wali Khel
Mobmit 'Khel.
Ibrahim Khel.
Kábul Khel.
Bakka Khel. Jani Khel.
Madda Khol.
Tori Khel, Manzar Khel.
Wuzi' Khel
Bora Khel.
Hassan' Khel.
Khidar Khel.



500
Wazir weddings.
wedding. The duá khair is then recited by all present and the boy's
father receives his companions' felicitations. This observance always
takes place at night, neither the boy nor the girl being present at it,
The boy's father now returns home and announces the betrothal
(nera) by distributing sweets in his village. He receives more con.
gratulations and the wemen sing marriage songs. No ornaments are
given to the girl and etiquette requires that she shonld even remain
in ignorance of her betrothal.
Some time after the newa comes the nana watai, when the bny accom-
panied by his father and 8. or 9 young men, goes to the girl's home,
taking with him a sheep which is slaughtered for the entertainment of
the whole village as well as the girl's household. In return the boy's
party is given supper and the boy presents a rupee (or as unany as five) to
the girl's family-a present which is usually placed in a dish and appro-
priated by a kinsman of the girl. In return her mother gives the boy a
silver ring. Merry making ensues in which ghi and coloured water are
sprinkled over the boy's party. Young people (of both sexes) of the girl's
village share in this merriment, which is renewed next morning with
grearer zest, so much so that the two parties often end up with a
promiscuous scuffle in which all the villagers join--all prudery being cast
aside, although Wazír women are as a rule very punctilions in social
intercourse.
If the nana watai has not been obsersed the boy is certain to be
haunted by the girl's kinsmeu with the words khara wutara, 'fasten up
the donkey. This phrase has now no known meaning, but it compels
the boy to take a sheep to the girl's home that evening, or at any rate
a day or two later, and slaughter it there. Half a dozen youths
accompany him ; and the observances for the rest resemble the nana
watai, except that the party dues not as a rule stay the night but
returns that same evening. The custom is called khara taral (to tie
up the donkey).
When the boy is of age and his father is in a position to carry out
the marriage it is usual from him to ask the girl's father if he is ready.
A date is then fixed for the wra (wedding : Pashtu wadah), a day
falling between the Ids being avoided, but any other day may be chosen.
Before this is done the balance of the bride-price must be paid up.
The boy's father then sends three sheep and enough grain to feed
the girl's village as well as his own parts. A man and two or three
old women takes these supplies with a set of three garments and some
ornaments for the girl.
Next morning the girl's village turns out and collects wood for the
expected wedding-party and that evening the villagers are feasted
on one of the sheep which is dubbed the largai mazl rood or wood-
cutcer's sheep). Simultaneously drums are beaten in the boy's
village and merry-making held there.
Nexo morning the other two sheep are butchered and preparations
wade to receive the wedding-party, which numbers from 100 to 150
souls and starts that afternoon, the inen dancing in front of it with
swords and firing at random to the accompaniment of drums and fifes.
The women in roar sing war-songs as well as love-songs. The pro-
cession must arrive before sunset, and it is met with a shower of



The Mahsúd Wazirs.
501
forman of the bries, finally crushi of reeds om in and a sme
stones, often causing serions injaries, by the village boys; but once it
enters the girl's house every respect is shown to it and it is comfortably
accommodated. After a meal, a curious dance, locally called mindor,
in which young men and boys form a wide ring with a drummer
and fife-player in the centre, is performed. Later two or more pro-
fessional dancing men give an exhibition of their skill, and a sweeper
enters the circle riding on a horse made of roeds on which he prances
round two or three times, finally crushing it down to the ground in front
of a kinsman of the bridegroom, and receiving from him a fee of one
rupee for his services. This curious observance is called the as zhob-
laual or 'mutilation of the horse.' The night passes in merrymaking.
Next morning a barber holds up a looking-glass to some of the bride-
groom's near kin and gets a rupee as his due, Then the bride is put
on a horse by her brother or a cousin and the bridegroom's mother
or a near kidswoman throws some sweetmeats over her head as an
offering. When the wedding party has on its return reached the bride-
groom's house nearly every member of it gives a rupee to the boy's
father or guardian, but he is not obliged to keep it. This is called
rupai achawal.
When the bride has dismounted at the bridegroom's house sweets
are distributed among the women by bis mother or sister and a male
child is placed in the bride's lap, so that she too may bear a son. She
is then made to put her hand into some ghi in order that her advent
may briox good luck and milch kine to the house. The sarwang, a
feast, is then given by the bridegroom to all who have contributed in
the rupai achawal. This brings to a close the day on which the wed-
ding procession returns from the bride's house.
Next evening a mulláh performs the nikáh in the orthodox way,
the bride's own consent being formally given, or if she is bashful her
representative, called dini wror or brother in the faith,' assents on
her behalf. Her dower is usually fixed at a small sum, Rs. 40 to
Rs. 80. On the following day, the next but one after the wedding, three
or four women, including the bride's mother if alive, visit her before noon
and take her back to her own home. This is called the dreyana. There
she remains for 8 or 9 days and is then again brought back to her
husband's home by one of his kinsmen, with a cow, goat or other
animal given her by her father, a present called the manacha. She
also brings home with her sarwor, food cooked in her father's house,
which is divided among the boys of her husband's village.
II.-Toe Mahsud Wazişs.
Origin.-The birth place of the tribe is said to be Kaniguram which
curiously is inhabited chiefly by URMURS. Makín, the true capital of the
Mabsúds, consists of a cluster of 12 villages, all Bablolzai. The
Abdulai predominate in ocher villages.
Organization. The present organization is given below. An expla-
nation of the name of each section, sub-division and division would do
inuch to elucidate the principles on which it is formed. In two sub-
divisions, Shahmirai and Sarmusbai, there are Black and Red sections,
which may be compared with the Tor-Spín factions found in other
tribes.



502
The Mahsúd Wagirs.
The Mahsáds boast that of all the Afghán tribes they alone have
remained frea. Their organization is intensely democratic, and they
havo no Khán Khel, any man who distinguishes himself being able to
rise to the rank of malik. Yet, in spite of this, clan and sectional
feuds are unknown, for the law of blood-revenge is based on the
principle that only the actual murderer should be punished. But
theory is one thing and practice another, so that blood feuds arise
and are interminable. For a full description reference may be made
to Lorimer's Waziri Pashto, p. 338 et seqq.
I.-MAHSUDS.
Clan 1.-Alizai, also known as Potia Khel.
Divisions.
Sub-divisions.
Sections,
Shabi Kbel
... 1. Astonai,
2. Patonai.
3. Baromai.
4. Sultanai.
5. Bibizai.
16. Khan Khel.
17. Khojakai.
Collectively Mangai,
Pali Khel ...
...
... 1. Shami Khel
...
... 1. Machi Khel.
Bábadur Khel.
Garerai.
2. Dasi Khel ...
...
Salemi Khel.
Guri Khel.
Malla Abel.
Darekai.
Kanjurai.
Gedi Khel ...
...
... 11. Khamir Khel
...
... 1. Paridai.
2. Batakai.
2. Khoedad Khel ...
1. Langar Khel.
2. Kei Khel.
8. Brahim Khal.
4. Ohund Khol,
5. Wazirgai.
6. Targaddi.
Shahmirai ...
...
1. Tor or black.
2. Sur or rod.
Malikdoai.



Mahsud sections.
503
Clan II.--Shaman Khel.
Divisions.
Sub-divisions.
Sections.
Ohahar Kbel
...
... 1. Darwal
...
...
...
8. Haidari ...
8. Zaria Khel
mia com a mi
Kasim Khel.
Brahim Khel.
Malla Khel.
Haji Khel.
Pir Muhammad Khel,
Iral Khel.
Madda Khel.
Bijal Khel
Mansur Khel.
Bahadur Khel.
Kbali Khol
...
... 1. Badawai
wia
2. Datorai.
3. Ali Khel ...
mia
cio an
Salemkai ...
5. Sarmusbai
ami a
Landia Khel.
Kemal Kbel.
Shakha Khal,
Aka Khel.
Tor or black.
Sur or red.
Galisbabi ...
...
2.
Mimo
1, Mangi Khal.
Mirwas Khal.
3. Matta Khel.
4. Kekhai,
Tapio ...
2, Galib Kho!
Badinzai...
...
1. Isap Kbel.
2. Usman Khel.
1. Rabimdad Kbo.
2. Por Khel.
3. Mariam Khel.
4. Jamal Khel.
1. Abdul Khel.
12. Dari Khel.
3. Kasim Khel
Clan III.-Bahlolzai.
ASA
Divisions.
Sub-divisions.
Sections.
Aimal Khel
...
... 1. Abdulai, Khanni Khel ... 1. Ghozhakai.
8. Salemkai.
3. Lalia Khel.
Shahmak Khel,
5. Nassri Khel.
6. Kemat Khel.
2. Nazar Khel, Aziz Khel .. Fateh Khel.
Manzar Khel.
Kharmach Khel Mamia Khel.
Hassan Khel.
Zirgar Khel.
Khan Khel.
5. Banga Kbel.
3. Malikshahi.
1. Khoodadi,
2. Bezadi.
4. Marsenzai.
1. Ekam Khel.
2. "Tutia Khel.
1, Haibat Khel
1. Nekzan Khel.
2. Abbas Khal.
. Sher Khel ... 3. Abdul Rahman Khel.
4. Jalal Khal.
6. Goga Khel,
6. Moib Khal.
2. Umar Khel
... 1. Sharin Khal.
12. Bakhti Khel.
-xin tina comidiniam si na
Band Khel
.
Nana Khel



504
Darwesh Khel sections.
Clan III.-Bahlolzai.
Divisions.
Sub-divisions.
Sections.
_
_
_
3. Kokarai ......
... 1. Jiir Khanai.
12 Ali Khanai.
8. Manda,
n'
4. Urmar Khel.
Dur.
Mulai ..
Shiogi
...
...
1. Kharmach Kbel.
2. Mamia Khel.
3. Urmar Khel.
4. Wuji Kbel.
5. Azbokai or Zokai.
6. Boji Khel,
Bobalai.
11. Boia Khel.
12 Kanna Kbel.
2. Mamadai ....
...
II.-DARWESH KAEL.
Clan 1.- Utmanzai.
Divisions.
Sub-divisions.
Sections.
Ibrahim Khel
...
Wali Khel
1 Tori Khel.
2. Madda Khel,
1. Saifali Kabul Khel.
Pipali
3. Miami
4. Malikshahi.
Jani Khel.
Bakka Khel,
1. Hassan Khel.
2. Waji Khel.
3. Barrak Khel.
Mahmit Khel
_
Clan 11.--Ahmadzai.
Divisions.
Sub-divisions.
Sections.
Hussain or Sain Khel ... 1. Hati Khel.
2. Umarzai,
3. Sirki Khel.
Kalo Khel ... 1. Spirkai,
Nasir-ud-din Shadi Khel (a) Bizzan Khel.
(6) Painda Khel.
(c) Khojal Khel.
(d) Badan Khel.
le) Khunia Khel.
Nasir-ud-din Bomi Khel... 1. Zalli Khel.
2. Toji Khel.
3. Gangi Khel.
4. Shadkai.
Another, authority divides the Ahmadzai thus :-
1. Hati Khel.
1. Sain Khel ... ... ... 3.. Umarzai.
3. Sirki Khel,
2. Kalu Khel, all the other sub-divisions, an i the Ali Khani at Wano.



Mahsud customs.
505
e hanging 100cent needlework similarity
The Darwesh are par excellence Wazírs being called Ster Wazir,
or great Wazírs, and the Mahsúds are in every respect their inferiors.
SOCIAL CUSTOMS. .
| Dress.-Men wear a white or dark blue pagri, and an angrakha
(sharai in Pashto) or a shirt, embroidered on the collar and front with
needle-work of silk and cotton, and a pair of loose trousers (shalwir),
usually made of strong white cotton cloth. Sandals are usually worn.
Women wear a gown (kamís) hanging loose to the feet, of chintz
ornamented about the neck and front with silken needlework: shalwar
made of imported cloth: and sandals but seldom shoes. The similarity
between men and women in dress is noticeable.
Women observe no parda, wear no veils and mix freely with the
men when administering to their wants. Hospitality is a prime virtue
and guests are welcomed by both men and women : for the latter the
guests first set aside a portion of the food provided by the host :
this is called the deg's share. The Mabsúds boast that they have no
poor man amongst them. Whenever a family is brought low by deaths,
accidents, or raids from without, the clan subscribes to re-establish
it, one bringing a bullock, another a blanket, and so on.
Marriage. The Mahsúd marriage customs are similar to those of
other Wazírs. The price of a woman ranges from Ils. 60 to 150.
The marriage procession, which goes from the bridegroom's house to
fetch the bride, consists of 100 to 200 young men, and 50 to 60 women
or young girls, who have two or three drums with them. The women
sing songs, and the young men dance, waving in their hands their
swords and shields, and others fire off their matchlocks. They also
take with them two or three sheep, or a bullock, with a quantity of
rice. One or two spend the whole night in noisy rejoicing. Next
morning the procession returns to its own village, taking in its midst
the bride, who is mounted on a mare. The marriage service is read
by the mullah after an interval of fiftrien to twenty days, the bride-
groom and the bride having no intercourse in the meanwhile. The bride
is in this way brought to her husband's house before her marriage
merely to become acquainted with his family. A woman whose hus.
bands invariably die is called akhraba sheza or a 'scorpion-like' woman.
Death.-Mourning consists in wailing and beating the breasts, in which
women join. Mulláhs wash the body and prepare it for the coffin,
the grave is dug by the young men of the village.
On returning from the graveyard the relatives and friends of the
deceased are entertained by men of a different section of the tribe
to their own.
Religion. It is said that the Mahsúds are all Sünnis. Kánigurm
is the seat of religion. It contains several Sayad families, settled there
for centuries. Mabsúds are slack in religious duties. They have
charms (ida), and apparently the Michan Khel have many kinds of
charms.* The Akhwunds practise cures by blowing. All Wazírs,
Dauris and even Hindus call Mamozi, the Martsi Khel, · Father, i. e.,
• Wasiri Pashto, p. 95.



506
Wazirs in Bannu.
Bábá Mamozi. A holy man endowed with miraculous powers is called
bzerg (buzurg).
Inheritance.--Inheritance is called miros (mirás). Mirot is the extinc.
tion of all the males of a family, and khei, or kheiz has a similar
meaning. These words may be significant of the importance of not
dying without male issue.
Amusements.-Mindor is the name of the Wazir dance. Dances are
performed on the Show Day (nendore pa vrez) of both Ids, when the
people dance and guns are fired off.
Dependants.--Appear to be koligars or korogars (i. e. kárigars)
blacksmith or mechanics; katanrais-monials who are also musicians,
and who appear to be of & peculiarly dark complexion; and Dirs or
Durs, a menial tribe which makes sacking and felt.
Language.-The Wazír dialect is apparently a variety of Pashto with
certain phonetic changes, the chief of which is the change of long
a into o, as in Sindhi, 8. g. doghi for dághi, nogha for nágha, kajowa
for kajáwa, etc. O of Punjabi becomes e as in jeta for jhoga, a young
buffalo.* R often becomes l as in dilbor darbár, jilga for jirga, etc. The
vocabulary appears to be full of Indian words, and the Indian months
seem to be in use.f Even à verse of the Qorán is called mantar.
The Wazír, in Bannu, have two branches : (1) Ahmadzai which in-
cludes the HÁTHIRA EL, ISPERKA, Bizankhel and OMARZAI, The Bizankhel
has four main divisions, Daulat, Iso and Umar Khan in the plains, and
Moghalkhel in the hills. The Paindakhel is & cognate clan, not descend.
ed from Bizan, which lives by trade and carrying salt more than by
cultivation: (2) UTMÁNZAI.
The Wazír customs in Bandu differ from those of the Bannuchis
and other Patháns,
The preliminary bargain is effected by the father or other near
relative of the boy. When this is arranged 10 or 15 men of the boy's
party with the boy go at bed-time to the girl's house, having sent before-
hand sheep, wheat and other necessities for a feast. Singing and
dancing go on all night, a distinctive feature beiog that the old
women of the bride's party come out with a coloured duid like that
used by Hindus at the time of the Holi and throw it on the men of the
boy's party. The bride-price is paid in the morning, if it can be
managed. The various murders, blood-feads and other wrongs lead
sometimes to very young girls being betrothed to the aggrieved party,
or else one is betrothed to a man on either side in order that peace
may be made.
-
-
-
* Owing to this modification of the o, u and au sounds there are some curious forms, e.g.
Indi for Hindu.
† January ...
July, Wassa.
February is Tarkha or Orbesho August.
(Barley harvest).
September, Assi.
March, Chetar.
October, Katyo.
April, Sok or Wasyok.
November, Mangar.
May, Krop or Jet.
June, Awor, Aowar.
December.



Wazír-Wirah.
507
in males*. Then on tih.co.
atives party to her mit
The price of the girl cannot in all cases be raised at onca. For in-
stance an uncle will promise his daughter to his nephew when they are
both quite small. One informant stated that he paid nothing at his
betrothal, but gave Rs. 100 a year after it, Rs. 200 two years later, and
that the marriage did not take place for another three years.
At the time of betrothal the father of the girl gives her a large
ring and a silk-worked handkerchief.
The husband does not go to the wedding, but only the men and women
of his family and acquaintance. Very serious resistance is sometimes
offered to his party on their arrival at the other village, wbich is
timed for dark. There is then a feast in the girl's house, after which
all the males go to the chauk and are entertained with singing and
dancing. The women of the bridegroom's party attire the girl, dress
her hair like a married woman's, and put menhdi on her. There is next
an interchange of small presents. The young boys of the bridegroom's
party being given red ropes, and the girls silken braids by the parents
of the girl. Each dancer is presented with a handkerchief.
In the early morning the bride is taken away. The brother or, if
there be none, the father of the girl returns with her to her hus,
band's house, but no other member of the girl's party. On arrival
most of the villagers disperse, but near relatives remain and are fed
at the expense of the bridegroom. The men also get a pagri each
and a rupee each is given to the women.
At bod-time the orthodox nikáh takes place and is followed by
consummation. People say that it is a sign of the degeneracy of the
times that patience is not observed, and that in the old days modesty
used to prevent consummation for a long time. The brother is present
during the nikáh and leaves next day. Three nights are spent by the
girl with her husband and then she goes back to her parents' house
with her father or brother, who comes to fetch her. She stops away
ten days or so and is again brought back by a relative of the husband.
Her father is supposed to give her a bullock, a goat or the like on her
second departure.
Slight differences may occur in different sections. The points to
notice are the presence of the bridegroom at the betrothal, his absence
from the wedding, and the accompaniment of the girl by her brother to
the husband's house. Ths dum plays little part except as a musician.
Wazír, said to be a sub-caste of the Awáns.
WEARA, an Aráíņ clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WELAN, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WEROÁNA, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
WIJBERE, a Kharral clan (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
Wijhí, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Multán.
WIJHI, & clan (agricultural) found in Shahpur.
WINZAT, a woman of the Ghulam class in Pesháwar.
WÍRAH, a Dogar clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
dirt with her her or brothio'



508
WirkWurgara.
1
WIRK, 11) a Ját tribe whose head-quarters are the Gujranwala and Labore
districts, especially the former in which they own 132 villages. They
claim origin from a Manhás Rájput called Virak, who left Jammu and
settled at Gbuchli in Amritsar; and in Gujranwala nearly a third of
them have returned themselves as Rájputs, but they marry freely
with the Ját tribes of the neighbourhood. They say that their ancestor
Virak was descended from Malhan Nams (Mal again !) the founder of
the Manhas tribe of Rájputs, and was connected with the Rájás of
Jammu. Leaving Parghowal in Jammu, he settled in Amritsar and
married a Gil Ját girl whose personal strength won his affections. On
his death she became satí, but was delivered of a son just as the pyre
was lighted, and though the bystanders wished to burn him too, he was
rescued by a mirásí who named him Ajiis. Customs at betrothal and
marriage are much the same as those of the Kablons. The first
observance at a wedding is the jandian, bit as a matter of fact all,
both men and women, assemble at a ber tree. There a hired ram
is washed and made to stand. If it shakes its head the ancestor is
supposed to be pleased. Then follow the distribution of sirá and
manda, the máyán, etc.- see under Waraich. The Gajranwala tradition
is that Wirk’š father Medersen (? Indar Singh) left Parghowál and
settled in Amritsar. By his Gil wife he had 3 sons, Drigar, Wirk and
Warran. Wirk left 4 sons of whom only one had issue, and 25 genera-
tions ago his grandson moved westwards into Gájráowála. There are
three main sections of the tribe, the Jopur, Vachra, and Jan. The tribe
rose to some political importance about the end of last century, ruling
a considerable tract in Gujranwala and Lahore till subdued by Ranjit
Singh. Intermarriage with the Waran is avoided, but is allowed with
all other Játs. The custom of pagȚi-vand prevails. Daughters do not
inherit, but adoption within the tribe and up to 10 years of age is
common.
(2) a Kamboh clau (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
Wíeye, an Aráiņ clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
. Wolána, a tribe of Játs, found in Sialkot, which claims Rájput origin. Its
eponym lived near Jhelum and its settlement in Sialkot dates from the
time of Mal Doo of Jammu.
WURGARA, one of the BAITANNI Pathán clanis found in Bannu, the other
being the Danna. The Wurgara are often styled a faqir gaum, and
are descended from the hill tribe which held the hills before the advent
of the Dannas. The latter have two septs Boba and Bobak.



609
be which sudokh to Chitral
of the whence the milies at the
YANG CAUNGPA—see under Káng-chumpa.
YESHKUN, see under Shín, p. 405 supra.
YIDAHÁh, a tribe which so styles itself in the Ludkho tract of Chitral and
gives the name of Yidokh to the whole valley with all its branches
from the Hindoo Koosh to the Chitral river. The tribe is found in the
upper Ludkho valley and is a portion of the race which occupies
Munján on the porthern side of the Hindoo Koosh whence they migrated
some seven generations ago. They number about 1,000 families and
like the Munjánis are all Maulais by sect: Biddulph's Tribes of the
Hinčno Koosh, p. 64.
Yohal, a Ját clan (agricultural) found in Amritsar.
YULFA, villagers, in Láhul. The Yulfa hold the great bulk of the fields in
jeolas or holdings (? bundles) subject to the payment of tal, i. e. rent or
revenue, the performance of bogár or corvée, and certain periodical
services to the Thakur. They were held by Lyall to be subordinate
proprietors of their holdings.
YÚSÚFZAI, a Pathán tribe described on p. 254 supra: see also pp. 250-1.



510
ZÁBIDí, a Sayad clau (agricultural) found in Montgomery.
ZAIDI, a Súfi sect or order which derives its name from Khwaja Abdul Ahad,
son of Zaid, whose shrine is at Basrá.
ZAIMUSHT, a tribe of Patháns, nearly all settled in Upper Míranzai.
ZAMÍNDÁR, a faction in Jhelum : see Cbaudbriál.
ZANJÁNí, a Sayyid clan (agricoltural) found in Amritsar.
ZANKBE, a dancing eunuch, dressed in woman's clothes.
ZARDASHT, cf. Pársí.
ZARKAN, a clan of the Kákar Patháns, neighbours of the Zarkandi Baloch.
ZARKANNI, another name for the Bagti (q. v.) tuman of the Baloch.
Zaing, lit.' erect,' in Balochi: also the name of a Baloch sub-tribe.
Zírak, one of the two great sections of the Gugiani Patháns.
ZMARI, a Pathán tribe which appears to be mainly confined to Balochistan.
It is descended from Miáni and is therefore connected with the Jáfir
and Lúni Patháns. It has a sub-sectiou called Mizri. With the
Músakhel they hold the crest of the main Sulaimán range to the west
of the outer bills held by the Ushtarána.
Zon, the Tibetan name for the Lohár or ironsmith.
ZUMRANI, a small Pathán clan found scattered over the Paharpur tract of
Dera Ismail Khán.



Appendices.
511
APPENDIX A.
The Utráddhe in Jhang* comprise the following sections :-
Abmanábádi, Attock
Khánijan
Ahújá, Hújá, Attock
Kera, Attock
Babbar, Babar, Gujrát
Khandpur, Sialkot
Banga, Sialkot, Bángí, Attock
Kharbanda
Bátra, Peshawar
Khattar
Bhúgrá
Khera
Bhúsri
Khetarpál
Bhútian
Khuráná, also in Gujrat
Bhúddi
Kochar, Attock
Bodhrájí in Attock
Kubbar, Gujrát
Botija, Attock
Kur. þá
Búdhrajá
Lúthra
Chachrá, also in Attock
Madán
Chanana, Sialkot, Chándha, Gojrát
Makhijá, Makijá, Pesháwar
Cháolá, also in Pesháwar, Attock, Gujrát
Manchindá, also in Siálkot, Attock.
Chhábrát also in Attuck, Gujrát
Mánkand, Attock
Chhadi, Gujrát
Minocbá, also in Gujrát
Chhokrá
Mának táhlá, also in Attock
Chitkárá
Máti, Attock
Chodí, Attock
Mendhirata, Attock
Chugi
Matijá, Attock
Dallă-wání, Multán
Migláni
Dhingrá, also in Attock
Mungia
Dúát
Nángpál, also in Attiva
Elawadhi
Nárang, also in Gujrát, Nárag in Attock
Gand
Nirulá, also in Peshawar, Gujrát
Gharbandi, Attock
Papila, Gujrát.
Ghita,
Pasrijá
Ghogar, Sialkot
Poplái
Girotrá, also in Pesháwar, Attock
Putáni, Attock
Gosán-Múle-Santie
Rájpál, Attock
Gúrúwárá, Sialkot
Ráwal, Attock, Gujrát
Qúláti Gujrát, Ghulátí, also in Attock
Riori
Gumbaz, Attock
Sachdeo, also in Gujrál
Gumbiar, lo
Sethi, also in Attock, Gujrát
Jalába
Sukeja, Attock
Kálra
Súnejá
Kandál
Thareja
Kantror
Ubbáwaj
Kathúria, also in Attock, Katúra in Wadwá, Attock, Wadhwa, Multán
Sialkot.
Wirmani
Kawatrá, Kawátra, Attock
The Dáhira or Dáhra in Jhang include the following Sections :-
A hújá, Huja, in Attock
Bawejá, Multan
Anejá
Bebri
Arnejá
Búdbrájá
Aspring, Attock
Billá
Bagáhi
Bhútná, Multán
Bagga, classed as Bári in Peshawar
Chábá, Chábrá, Attock
Bajáj, Bazáz, Attock, Multán
Chachrá, Bunjáhi in Peshawar
Balesri, Attock
Chánná
Bángá, also in Multán
Cháolá, Attock, Gujrát, Multán: Bári in
Batija, Attock
Pesháwar
Batra, Attock, Multán: Bunjabi in Peshawar Chugh. Gujrát: Bunjáhi in Peshawar
* Other Districts in which got is also found are noted against its name.
+ The Chhabras do not wash their hair or clothes in Mágh and make a guest sleep with
his shoes under his head.
I Duas do not use new gourds and the al (said to be a kind of cucumber).
Š The Kathuriás are said to be great smokers.
i Khamijans who affect the Guru Walabbhí Thákur of Mathra abstain from meat and liquor.
.



512
Appendices.
APPENDIX A-continued.
Cbhipuniani
Chichrá, Attock
Chitkárá
Dang, also in Attock
Dangra, Attock
Dúá
Dhingrá, Bári in Peshawar
Dandlá
Dárá, Multán
Dhamija
Dora
Dorejá or Kharbiehá*
Duleja, Attock
Gabat
Gakkar, Attock
Gai, Attock
Gand, Attock, Multán
Gándhí, Bári în Pesháwar
Ghátti, Bári in Peshawar
Ghanbir
Gheia
Giddar
Gúgnani
Goubar
Gogiá
Gorewárá, M Itán
Gomar, Attock
Gulra, Bári ia Peshawar
Gúſtattá, Multán
Hasijá, Multán
Hora, Bári Gujrat in Peshawar
Hori, in Attock
Hújá, Bunjabi in Pesháwar
Húria
Ichbpilání, Multán
Jagesar, Attock
Janjikbel
Jbánb
Jonejá
Jánjikhel
Jhatia, Gujrát
Jotmuráda, Attock
Julíjár, Attock
Kúkar or Kúkorjá, also in Attock, Gujrát
Kálſá, also in Multán
Kamrá, also in Multán
Kantaror
Kanwátrá, Multán
Khadpúr, Gujrat
Khattar
Khúrána, also in Attock, Multán
Khingar, Khetarpál
Khírbát
Kinţá
Kochar, Bárí in Peshawar
Lakhíja, Attock
Langáni, Attock
Lúnd
Lúllá
Lungari, Beri in Pesháwar
Lota
Madán
Mádappotrá
Makejá, Multán
Makhíjá, Gujrát
Makkar, also in Gujrát, Multán, Attock
Mánaktablia, Attock
Manjál, Multán
Matija, Attock
Menhdirattá
Mígláni, Múnjrál
Narang, Narg, Attock
Páhwa, Páwá in Attock
Popli
Paruthi
Pasrijá
Patija
Protí, Attock
Rachpanri, Attock
Rajbál, Attock
Ráwal, Attock
Rewari
Rinja, Attock
Sachdeo
Sainí, Attock
Sanni, Bári in Peshawar
Sanríjá, Attock
Shakarshúdha
Sídáná, also in Attock
Sindwáni
Sappá, Gujrát, Bári in Peshawar
Satijá
Setia
Salujá, Balucha, Gujrát
Bechi
Sopri, Attock
Tagojá, Multán
Takkar
Taneja
Thakrál
Tílújá
Tágrá
Tutíjá Gujrát, (Siálkot)
Ubbá wij
Utrejá
Wadwá, also in Attock
Wasdeo
The Dakhana gots in Multán are :--
Ahújá
Badani
Βαααα
Chandni
Dhanija
Dhingrá
Gajmáni
Gera
* Kharbísha is said to mean ill-favoured.
+ Gábá women eschew the egg-plant,



Appendices.
513
APPENDIX A-concluded.
Gídar
Gorija
Kalrá
Kamrá
Kangar
Kúkar
Lúnd
Lullá
Mahani
Manjál
Mastani
Mehndirattá
Mebtáni
Mendá
Nángpál
Pabrejá
Rahejá
Sadána
Saneja
Satejá
Taneja
Tateja
Wadhwa



514
Appendices.
APPENDIX B.
Bhatti clans : Lunar Rajputs :-
.
Bár
Bhagsin
CHADDRAR,* Rájoke.
DACHCHI
Jaloke
Jandráko
Kahár
Máneke
Mutamal
SÁMII
Bhatti septs in Siálkot :-
Annaeke
Asoke
Dirke
HATTIÁRI
Huraike
Kuthrálu
NARKAT
Sideoke
Sungraeke
Some of these are descended from Bhíropál,
Giopál, Koropál, Kuthrál and Wulli, the 5
son3 of Bhoni.
* But the Chaddrars are also said to he Solar Rájputs.



515
Appendues.
APPENDIX C.
Gots of the Chuhfas :-
Adewal, Adiwál or Audewal
Athwal
Atkal
Babhi
Badlán, claim doscent from Punwar Rajputs
Bagahti
Baggan
Bagar, Bagri
Bagri, Bagre
Bahmi
Bains
Bálásbahi
Bálgher
? Bảl Gobíra
Balu
Bálu
Bárú
Basbar, Basúſ
Basir
Bed
Bedlan, cf. Badlan
Berkan
Bhabanh (? b)
Bhádaſ
Bhadiyán
Bhainváli
Bhandara
Bhannu
Bhatti
Bhikbarke
Bhobra
Bhumbak
Bigási
Bignar
Bila or Bile
Bohat (Babut)
Bome
Borat, Bort, Burt
Brúmak
Budlagan, cf. Badlan : ? Buhlayan
Burt, see Borat
Bút,
Chalarna
Chanáſa
Chanauria, Chanwaria, Chanware
Chandal, Chandália
Charan
Chauhan
Chedi, Chedde, Chida, Chidai
Chbappar-, Chhapri ban (d)
Chhúnja
Chida, see Chedi.
? Chiphrahai-
Chirrie
Chosati
Dab Gohar, -Gher
Dádri
Dakhiad
Dalgach, Dalgache
Damár
Dargam
Dargat
Deghachh
Dháb, see Dháp
Dhai i Dhia)
Dhakalia
Dhalian, Dhalhaan
Dhának
Dhanwal
Dhan(u)kwal
Dhanar
Dháp
Dhariwal
Dhilwan
Dhelar
Dibla
Dilgaj
Dil Sassi
Dohápa
Donare
Dúgal
Dulgach
Dumra
Farvain
Gachand, Ghachand
Gáchli
Gágra
Gaital
Gáyat, ? -gat
Garchade
Ganbar
Gegia
Ghachand, see Gachand
Ghai
Garu, Gháru
Ghasur, Ghassar, Ghosar
Ghilot
Ghogharia
Gil
Gilgachh
Godinál, Godiála, Godála
Gogalia
Gudbúla
Gultani
? Ghongar Begi
Hále
Hans
Hátus ? . Hans
Hátwal
Jadan
Jagáhrá
Jaidia
Jan(y)gála
Jhangála
Jhaba
Jhai, Jhaya
Jhanjhotar, Janjbotar, Jhajotar
Jhanj útar
Jhanjúba
Jhaute
Jhinju
Jhoni
Jhonj
Jhunjhat
Joria
Joia



516
Appendices.
APPENDIX C-continued.
Jutáli
Kagát
Kágrá, Kagri, Kágria, Kágra Kakri
Kahárú
Kaliata
Kalidhai
Kaliyána, áni, (? Kariána)
Kandáre, Kandiáre, Kanciára, Kandarai,
Kandhare.
Kangra
Kardita
Karotia
Kariána
Kharalia
Kharalni
Khassar, see Ghosar
Khokhar, -ia,
Khore
Kilyara
Kortána
Kosar, see Ghosar
Kubhana ? Kuli
Kuliána
Kutana
Lahánti
Ladhar
Lahauri
Lahúra
Labíra
Lahotni
Lohar
Lohat
Lonia
Losayat
Loti
Loyat
Ladhar, Ludhar
Lumbar
Lút, Lute*
Madhal
Madhar
Magsar
Mahde
Mahoti
Mabrolia
Makiyána
Mandotia
Manhar
Manj
Matiu, Mattu, Mathu, Mittu
Mekha
Melawanda
Michal
Milkhat
Miltu ? Mittu
Miltur -seo Maltu
Mohne
Mohai
Momi, Momc
Muli
Nahar, Nahir, Náhar
Nahl
Nahoti
Nábú
Ojina
Paganai
Pail Powár
Pandit, -Joia, -Miau
Panwar
Pareche, Parcha
Parbár, Pirbár
Partán
Peti
Pbál
PharW8 chín
Pidhal
Pindpbor
Pindhár
Pirhár, see Parhár
Pirwal
Pohál
Puma
Rathwal
Rangreta
Ranjilá
Ráti, Ratia, (? re), Rati
Ratte (Shahpur)
Redlan
Rohiwan
Rumál
Ratál
Saddi, Saddu
Sahota, Sahuta, Sahotra
Sanatar
Sangar
Sangelia
Sangsat
Sanjotre
Saraswati
Barbati
Sarni
Sáron
Sarowte
Sarpatra
Sárgar
Sarshal
Sarsut, cf. Saraswati :
Sársod
Sarswal
Sárwán
Sarwate
Satri
Set (Chanauria)
Shabotri
Sheikhre
Sidhu or Jhinjhu, ct. Dhat Sicbi
Sindhu
Sirswara
Soaini
Soda
Soria
Sosti, Sústa
808wál
Suda, cf. Soda
* The Lút were at one time great robbors and boldly claim that lúg has come to mear
spoil 'in consequence.



Appendices.
517
APPENDIX C-concluded.
Suegohar
Suri Lahotni
Susne
Sus Gohar (Hari got)
Sústá, see Sosti.
Súth
Tagraina
Tank, Tanak, Ták, (Tamak ?)
Tanboli
Teji, Teje
Tengre, Tingre
Teohar
Tosamar
Ujjainiwala
Uthwal, Uttwal
Wáldi



518
Appendices.
APPENDIX D,
The following is a list of the Gújar sections :-
Achhwan, Delhi
Adháva, Delhi and Gurgaon
Anbáota, descendants of Anbapál, Delhi
Awana, Ludhiána, Hoshiarpur and Gujrát:
Awána, Hazára
Babarwal, Gurdaspur
Babanian, Gujrát
Badhana, Gurgaon, Ludhiána, Hoshiárpur:
Badanás, Hazára
Bagri, Kapúrthala: Bagļa, Kar-nál:
Bagaria, Gurdaspur : Bagri, Hoshiarpur
Baharwal, Gujrát: Báhari. Ambála, Ludhi-
ána, Hoshiarpur
Bahlot, Gujrát
Bainsi, Jullundur
Bainsla, Delhi
Bairallu, Gurgaon
Bajár, Gujrát, Hazára: Bujar,* Gurdaspur,
-said to be of Ját origin: Juliundur,
Hoshiarpur : Bijar, Ludhiana
Bajiram, Gujrát
Bakhla, Thánesar
Balian, descended from Banir(u)pál, Delhi
Banat, Ludhiana
? Baima, Ludbiána
Bábian, Gujrát: Banniána, Kaithal: Bania,
Ludhiana, Hoshiárpur, Hazára
Bansalha, Delhi, see Bánsatta
? Bánsla, Gurgaon and Karnál
Banth, Ludhiana, Hoshiarpur, Gujrát, Gur-)
daspur, said to be of Ját origin
Baraſa, Kaithal: Barera, Ludhiana
Barj, Hazara
Barkat, Gujrát: -gat, Ludhiána, Hoshiár.
pur, Gurdaspur
Barráh, Gujrát
Báru, Gujrát and Kaithal
Basai, Gujrát
Básatta, Gurgaon
Basoia, Hoshiarpur
Bat-ál Gorsi, Jullundur
Báthá, Kapúrtbala : Banth,* Gurdaspur
Bathan, Kapúrthala
Battan, Ludhiana
Baunkar, Ludhiána
Belsar, Thánesar
Bhabra, Jullundur
Bhadána, Gujrat : dhana, Delhi, Jullundur,
Gurdaspur
Bhaini, Kapúrthala
Bhalesar, Gujrát, Gurdaspur: -rá, Hoshiár.
pur
Bhamru, Gurgaon
Bhand, Gujrát
Bhanesar, Ludhiáda
Bhani, Jullundur
Bhansiá, Hazára
H. Bhargar, Nábha :-kar, Gujrát
Bhalhati, Thanesar
Bhatti, Kapurthala, Nábha, Gujrát, Delhi :
Bhatias, Kaithal, Hoshiarpur: Bbati,
Karnál, Ludhiána
Bhaura, Gurdaspur
Bhobla, Ludhiana
Bhodwál, Pánipat
Bhojki, Hosbiarpur
Bhomele, Hoshiarpur : Bhumla, Hazára
Bhonjak, Ludhiana
Bhotla, descendants of Bharup, Delhi
Bhus, Ludbiána
Bidhori, Gurgaon, Delhi
Bijarai, Ludhiana
Bijor, Gurdaspur
Bijrán, Hazára
Bilan, Hoshiarpur
Bintban, Nábha
Blatia, Gurdaspur
Bokan, Delhi : Bukkan, Gujrát
Bola, Ludbiána
Budhána, descendants of Bhopal, Delhi
Butar, descendants of ditto ?
Chabrá, Hazára
Chakor, Karnál
Chajju, Bahawalpur
Chala, Gurdaspur
Chalguri, Ludhiana
Chandaila, Delhi, Giurgaon
Chandána, Karnál
Chaprána, Delhi, Nábúaf
Char, Nábha: Chár, Gujrát: Cbar, Kaithal,
Ludhiana, Boshiarpur, Gurdáspur
Charia, Ludhiana
Chauhán, Gujrat, Thánesar, Karnál, Am.
bála, Ludhiana, Jullundur, Hoshiarpur,
Hazára
Chautrí, Hazára
Chechi, Delhi, Kaithal, Thánesar, Karnkl.
Ambála, Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur : Chain.
chi, Gurgaon: Cheji, Ludhiána, Hazára,
originally Kathápas
Chedar, Ludhiana
Chhachhi, Kapurthala : Chacha, Nábha
Chháli, Gurdaspur, Gujrát
Chhammán, Pánipat, claim to be Tunwar
Rájputs by origin
Chhauris, Delbi
Cbhadle, Hoshiarpur
Chháwali, Kapárthala : rí, Gurdaspur,
Gujrát, Jullundur
Chhawán, Kapúrthala
Chhokar, Karnál, Panipat, claim to be
Jádun Rájputs by origin, Gujrát
Chhora, Kapúrtbala
Chinori, descendants of Chhainpal, Delhi
* Claim Ját origin.
of The Bhargar in Nábha do not affix wooden planks to their doors or roofs, but use
thatch; because one of their women became sati, but the building raised in her honour was
never completed. This looks like a tradition of a hypäthral shrine.
The Chapráná, Bhargar,



519
-
Appendices.
APPENDIX D-continued.
Chohla, Ludbiána
Chokan,* Delhi and Nábha
Chokar, Ludhiana
Chupra, Gurdaspur, Chopřá, Ludhiana
Dabhdar, Kapurthala, Dabdar, Gujrát
Dandi, Hoshiárpur
Dángi, Hoshiarpur: Dangi, Ludhiana :
Danji, Ambála
Dao, Hazára
Dápi, Karnál
Datyár, Karnál
Dedár, Hazára
Dedhar, Kapárthala
Dedhsar, Ambala
Debar, Gujrát
Dhaidha, descendants of Diptipal, Delhi
Dhakkar, Ludhiana, Hoshiarpur, Kapúr:
thala, Gujrát
Dhalák, f Kaithal, Karnál
Dhảo, Gujrát: Dhu, Thánesar
Dhawati, Nábha
Dhidar, Hoshiárpur
Dhinda, Gujrát
Dholi, Karnál
Dhosi, Karnál
Dhunchak, Gujrát
Doga, Gujrát
Doi, Gurgaon, Nábha, Gujrát
Durati, Gurgaon
Fatali, Fatili, Gujrát
? Gábdan, Gujrát
Gaige, Gujrát
Gajgáhi, Gujrát : originally Khatánas, but
called thus from gajgah, a silver orna.
ment worn by horses
Gaur, Ludhiana
Garle, Kaithal
Gegi, Gujrát, Gurdáspur, Ludhiana
Ghori Ráp, Gurgaon
Gigal, Ludhiana
Gila, Hazára
Godhri, Gujrát
Gorsi, Delhi, Kaithal, Karnál, Nábha,
Ludhiána, Hoshiarpur, Jullundur, Ka.
púrthala, Gurdaspur, Gujrát, Hazára
Hakla, Gujrat, Hoshiarpur
Határ, Karnál
Hekaria, Hoshiarpur
Hir, Hoshiarpur
Jagal, Hazára
Jábar, Thápesar
Jaji, Jullundur
Jand, Nábha
Jandhar, Karnál
Jangal. Ludhiana, Gujrát
Jagal, Gurdaspur
Jatla, Gurdaspur
Jayyan, Karnál
Jhandar, Gujrat : Jhindar, Hazára
Jhokar, Tháñesar
Jhori, Ludhiána
Jhút.kahne, Karnái
? Jeji, Thánesar
Jindo, Gurdaspur: Jindar, Hoshiarpur
Kahogar, see Khotar, Thánesar
Kaira, Hoshiarpur
Katár, Hoshiarpur
Kálas, Kaithal, Ludhiána, Kapurthala,
Gurdaspur, Gujrát: Kílás, Hazára
Kália, Hoshiárpur
Kalsár, Karnál : Kalsan, Ludhiana
Kalsíán, Karnál, claim to be Chauhan
Rájputs by origin, Pánipat
Kaneji, Ludhiana
Kandal, Hazára
Kanti, Ludhiana, Hoshiarpur
Kapasia, Delhi
Kari, Házára
Kaſliána, Gurgaon
Kásála, Thánesar
Ká san, Karnál
Kasána, Gurgaon, Delhi, Kaithal, Nábha,
Ludhiána, Hoshiárpur, Gurdáspur, Guj.
| rát, HazẤra
? Kataria, Hoshiarpur
Kathária, Hazára
Katáru, Gujrát: Katárias, Kaithal: Katari,
Ludhiana : Kataria, Gurdaspur: Kathána,
Kapúrthala, Hazára : Kath, Thánesar,
Karnál : Kat., Hoshiarpur, Jullundur,
Katnes, Kaithal
Khanári, Karnál
Ktanda, Hoshiarpur
Kharáná, Nábba : Khal-, Delhi
Khari, Gurgaon, Delhi, Ludhiana
Khári, Kaithal, Gurdaspur, Gujrát
H. Khatána, descendants of Khattipál, Delhi,
Gurgaon, Ludhiána, Gurdaspur, Gujrát,
Hazára. In Nábha (Báwal) they claim
to be Tanúr Rájputs and to have come
from Kathu-nagar in Jaipur. As devotees
of Báwá Mohan Dás of Bhadawas they
ayoid flesh and liquor.
Khepașs, Kaithal, Hoshiarpur: Khepor,
Gurdaspur
Khir, Ludhiáda
Khohar, Gurgaon, Karnál : -par, Ludhiána
Khokhar, Thánesar
* Sankat, a Chauhan Rajput had his abode in Sámbhar, but he was a great robber and was
obliged to leave it. He carried off a damsel whose kinsmen pursued him, but fled on hear.
ing a barber ring the marriage-bell. Hence these Gujars are called Chokan, 'one who
misses.' As devotees of Ban Deo the Chokans do not use cotton without offering some to
him, lor will they burn cotton sticks for fuel. The first tonsure is also performed at Ban
Deo's shrine in Raipur.
t Claim Khatri origin.
i Only giving daughters to the Khoter and Chhokar Gujars east of the Jumna, the
Dhaláks have not unreasonably brought upon their village, Koorak, suspicions of female
infanticide.



pur
520
Appendices.
APPENDIX D-continued.
Khoter, U. P.
Mundan, Delhi : Mund, Foshiarpur: dan,
Kisani, founded Kiluwil in Kapúrthala
Karnál: .addan : Kaithal
Kohli Kapurthala : Koli, Gurgion, Karnál, Murári, Gujrat, Hoshiarpur
Hoshiarpur, Lndhiána, Gurdaspur, Guj. Namará, Hoshiarpur, Gujrát
rät, Hazára
Nangri, descendants of Naghpál Delhi
Kokni, Ludhiana
Nijra, Baháwalpur
Lada, Gujrát
Niru, Ambála
Ladi, Gujrát, Ambala
Nikadi, Delhi
Lá., Hoshiarpur, Hoshiarpur
Nun, Ludhiina, Gujrát: Nún, Hoshiarpur
Lakhan Rai, Gujrát
Padhana, Gurdaspur
Lali, Kaithal, Thánesar, Ludhiana, Gurdás. Pagar, Hoshiarpur
Paili, Gurgaon
Lambnúr, Gujrát
Pamrá, Hazára
Langrana, Gujrát
Panúh, Bahawalpur
Latali, Ludhiana
Pasáni, Kapurthala
Lavi, Jallundur
Pasaria, Ludhiana
Loda, Kaithal
.i, Gurdaspar, Paswal, Ambála, Ludhiana, Kapurthala,
Ludhiana, Hazára
Hoshiarpur, Gujrat, Gardaspur, Hazára :
Logan, Thanesar
Pos, Kaithal
Lohnur, Delhi : •mur, Gurgaon, Ludhiana Patta, Ludhiana
Lobsar, Gujrát
Paur, Nábba, Gujrát: Pur, Hoshiárpui,
Loti, Karnál
Hazára : Por, Kaithal, Ludhiana
Luida, Gujrát
Phadár, Kapúrthala
Lúmar, Hoshiarpur
Phagna, Delhi
Madher, Ludhiana
Phambra, Gujrát
Mahesi, Gujrát, Hoshiarpur
Phogni, Gurgaon
Mahor, Ludhiana
Pholra, Hoshiarpur: -i, Ludhiana
Majwal, Gurdaspur
Phulsa, Gurdaspur
Makas, Hoshiarpur
Phumbla, Gujrát
Makkar, Gujrát
Poswal, see Pas- : Poswár, Gurgaon
Malkana, Gurdaspur
Powár, Kapúrthala
Málú, Hazára
Rai, Hoshiárpur
Mangas, Gurgaon
Rainkawal, Delhi
Mankaria, Ludhiana
Ralaiti, Gujrát
Maradi, Nábha
Ráthi, Kaithal, Karnál, Ludhiana
Marer, Karnál
Ratwál, Thanesar
Margat, Jullundur
Rawal. Karnál (27 villages in Pánípat),
Mehrer, Ludhiana
claim to be Khokhar Rajputs by origin
Melu, Gurdaspur, Kapurthala, Nábha : * Rawalsar, Ludhiana
Mehlu, Gujrāt, Ambala, Ludhiana : Milú, H. Ráwat Mundan, Nábha, claim descent
Hazára
from Ráwat and Garsi a Gujari, the bride
Melmú, Hazára
whom he won after a severe struggle in
Mesi, Ludhiana
which many heads (mundan) fell. In
Meti, Ludhiana
Jaipur, where they are numerous, they
Metli, Ludhiana
avoid widow remarriage and keep their
Mitla, Ludhiana
women in parda, but this is not the case
Modi, Gurdáspur, said to be of Pathan in Nábha.
origin
Saber, Gujrát
Mohu, Ludhiana
Sangrana, Gujrát
Mokar, Ludhiána
Sángu, Gujrat :
: .ghu, Kaithal :
Mouan, Kapúrthala, Hoshiarpur, Gurdás. Sángon, Thánesar : Sangu, Ludhiana
purt said to be originally Kahlon Játs, Sanju, Hazára
Gujrat : Mohnin, Mubnin, Ludhiana
Saramdna, Gujrát
Mori, Ludhiana and Hoshiarpur
Sardhana, Delhi, Nábha, Ludhiana
Motan, Gujrát
Sari, Bahawalpur
Motbsar, Ambala
Sardhi, Karnál
Motla, Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur
Súd, Ludhiana, Hoshiarpur, Kapúrthala,
Motri, Ludhiana
Gurdaspur, Gujrát
Muderu, Ambála
Surán, Nábha
* In Nábha the Melu are converts to Islam, but still avoid 4 gots in marriage. Their
women wear the gown, and they avoid blue clothes. They will not build two hearths close
together; or sell milk, lest the animal fall ill, so they sell ghi only.
Baid to be endogamous in Gurdsspnr.



521
Tanch, Hazára
Tandar, Jullundur
Tandi, Ludhiana
Tangri, Gurgaon
Tanis, Ludhiana
Tanár, descendants of
Nábha
Taoni, Ambála
Tas, Gujrát
Teru, Hazára
Thargali, Ludhiána
Appendices.
APPENDIX D-concluded.
Thekaria, Gurdaspur, Gujrát
Thikria, Hazára
Thila, Gujrát
Topa, Gujrát: originally Kathanas, one of
wbom paid Akbar Rs. 1,25,000 in topas
Tonp-al, Delhi, for the privilege of building Gujrát town
Túr, Gurgaon, Kaithal, Ludhiana, Hoshiar.
pur, Kapúrthala, Gurdáspur, Gujrát
Vodar, Gurdaspur
Wape, Karnál



522
Appendices.
APPENDIX E.
Some of the 84 gots of the Kálábansi Jhiwars of Gurgaon, Boria Kanthiwala by caste,
Abid
Kakralia Babronat
? Antal or Chanwar
Khotoria Baironat
Baironat
Khontel
Balanot
Kurdet
Bambawa
Lamcharta
Malia
Bargajar
Canhin
Nohal
Panwal
Dogeta
Handia
Phalaria
Kataria
Bhakkarwal
Unta Sand
Antal
Badran
Baison
Banhata (Baráhia)
Bhatiára, Bhatti
Brahia
Chálag
Chauhan
Dhonchak
Dhorá
Gádri
Hadda
Insa
Inar
Jáglán
Jhiwar gots in Karnál.
Jhoka, Kalan
Kalian
Kangar
Kaison
Lemsa
Lohlá
Mahir
Malre
Matoria
Puán
Radhán (Rahdan)
Ruhal
Tailian
Tindman (Tuar)
Turke



523
Appendices.
APPENDIX.F.
JULAHA GOTS.
The following are the Muhammadan gots in Jind :-
Badgújar
Baisal
Bala'ich
Barmí
Bhákar
Bhokhi
Hethí
Jógne
Jopú
J6ye
Kilak
Kamál
Petpáře
Punwar
Saddhú
Sabdéo
Sárad
Saroya
Sinhmár
Sispál
Sobal
Tóhdi
Túr
The Jangla Muhammadan gots in Nábha are :-
Baliních
Básí
The Para Muhammadan gots in
Bhatti
Nábha are :-
Chauhan
Chhólík
Ohhariwal
Chhútín
Dhódha
Chhutóí
Dhúna
Dhúr
Dhúníe ?
Kánjan
Jamit
Laksir
Kabin
Loi
Kanchhar, Khéncbaf in Jind Med
Katára, .yá, in Jind
Parchia
Lahnu, Lonú in Jind
Sehike
Midhar
Móth Mal
Radh, Rad in Jind
Samb
Sardpál, ? Saropál in Jind
Saroya in Jind
Sindhu
Sins Mal
Uchán
The following are the gots in Kapúrthalá :-
? Aklér
Alei
Bépál
Bhular
Datís
Dégal
Déo
Dérar
Dhadlo
Dúdar
Gil
Jaimal
Jhat
Kádar
Kaiſú
Kóſí
Kuráh
Mad
Mamún
Mohli
Móna
Mórá
Nadí
Nandi
Margat
Pandan
Parat
Patti
Radhawa
Ráhal
Radji
Ráwan
Sahmal
Saigal, Sahkal
Satta
Sindhu
86dal
Sodi



524
(1) Barrar
(2) Thind
(3) Abdal
(4) Sandhi
(5) Dhot
(6) Josan
(7) Dhanju
(8) Bhawan
(9) Mami
(10) Hande
(11) Matte
(12) Ratan Pal
(13) Jammun
(14) Jauri
(15) Kaure
(16) Jie
(17) Jhandi
(18) Mahrok
(19) Khand
(20) Trij
(21) Jáhapi
(22) Jag
(23; Bhandari
(24) R$6
(25) Dasre
(26) Nághpál
Appendices,
APPENDIX G.
KAMBOHS. BAWAN GOTA.
(27) Pandhu
(28) Nárú
(29) Jatmal
(30) Shahi
(31) Sothpa)
(32) Banuri
(33) Batti
(34) Tarni
(35) Lal
(36) Channa
(37) Nandbe
(35) Burme
(19) Sahige
(40) Gallon
(41) Takhe
(42) Same
(43) Nandan
(44) Banayek
(45) Mahesi
(46) Chandi
(47) Bagi
(48) Lore
(49) Totie
(50) Ghế
(51) Chatarth
(52) Pathan
The gots of the Chaurasi gotá Kambobs are :.
(1) Jaham
(2) Kokre
(3) Barkaro
(4) Bargoto
(5) Kawhi
(6) Makaure



Appendices.
525
APPENDIX H.
Tho 22 Kanet khels in Kotába.
Badyáli
Banál
Bhadál
Bhanúrál
Ohanyani
Chhalánú
Damrál
Dárari
Gomhál
Kandlál
Khanori
Khauti
Khawal
Kodhali
Kothal
Kotyál
Mahlu
Math
Phatról
· Rajána
Sohti
Tohni
* Said to be originally Brahmans who • degenerated into Rajputs. All the Rajput
degenerated into Kanets by adopting karera. P. N. Q. I., $ 761,



526
Appendices.
APPENDIX I.
KUMHAR GOTS.
The Hindu Mahr gots are reported to be as follows :-
Ahitan, Jind. Cf. Aitan in Gurdáspuri Kumbharwal, Jind
Aku, Jínd
M&hún, Jind
Badlía, Sirmúr (from Bádli near Delhij Nokhál. Jind : Lahore*
Balun, Máler Kotla
Pándi, Jind
Barál, Jind
Pinsia, Jind
Bargoti, Jind
Ratnia, Jind, Máler Kotla
Bargúná, Jind
Rokne, Jind
Bawaniwal, Jind
Sainmár, Máler Kotla
Bharál, Jind
Sangroha, Jind : Lahore*
Bhopal, Jind
Sárdíwál Jind
Cháolí, Jind
Sarobi, Sirmúr.
Charak, Jind
Sarsuta, Máler Kotla
Cbhalgánia, Jind
Shermár, Sirmúr
Chond, Jind
Sinbmár, Jind
Dál, Jind
Sohal, Máler Kotla, Jind
Dharán, Jind
Sokhal, Jind, Máler Kotla, Láhore* (=drier)
Dírath, Jind
Sokhlán, Jind
Doríwál, Jînd
Bulgania, Máler Kotla
Ghúen, Jind
Sunáre, Jind
Golbán, Jind
Sunámre, Sirmúr (from Sunám)
Jalandhrá, Jind
Tania, Jind.
Jhoke, Jind
Tánk, Jind
Karafwal, Jind
Tile Phiár, Jind
Kattó, Jind
Turkiwal, Jind
Kelia, Jind, Kilia, Lahore*
The Hindu Gola gots are said to be 180,000 in number and to include :-
Badlia, Rohtak
Jalandhra,* Lahore
Badmunda, Lahore
Jhajhari, Rohtak
Baihonwál, Lahore
Kargwal, Lahore
Bairwal, Gurgaon
Karwiwal, Gurgaon
Barawal, Gurgaon.
Kasena, Gurgaon
Bariwal, Rohtak.
Khadilia, Rohtak
Bedwal, Gurgaon
Kharolia, Rohtak
Bhadarpuria, Gurgaon
Khataolia, Gurgaon
Bhagauria, Labore
Máloria, Rohtak
Bhandoria, Gurgaon
Mamoria, Gargaon
? Bharatpuria, Rohtak
Mároția, Rohtak
Bhatiwal, Lahore
Marwal, Gurgaon
Bhekolia, Gurgaon
Phárwá, Gurgaon
Bisaria, Gurgaon
Sakharlía, Gurgaon, Sukhralia, Lahore
Danwaria, Gurgaon
Sakwalia, Gurgaon
Dbalwaria, Gurgaon
Satwansia, Gurgaon
Dhanghan, Gurgaon
Thangria, Gurgaon
Dbamiwal, Gurgaon
Tajária, Rohtak
Dhiminal, Gurgaon
? Tainanwal, Gurgaon
Haibaria, Gurgaon
Tesia, Gurgaon
Jadalia, Gurgaon
Tharharia, Gurgaon
Jajoria, Gurgaon
Tohaniwal, Gurgaon
1. Márwárí. Of these the Begrí or Márwárí have the following gots in Jind :-
Babalia
Bainiwal
Bhuriwal
Dadarwal
Gauri
Ghasolia
Itang
Karoriwal
Kathelwal
Pansia
Sanghathia.
Sánthián
Sokhal
Bundan
* Nakwal respected ' lit. 'having hair on the nose,' Pers, nák bál.



Appendices.
527
APPENDIX I-continued.
In Sialkot District the Desí have the following gots : -
Ahitan.
Kakialia
Bajhotra
Keon
Barial
Kir
Bhikhkhan
Lole ?
Chunkotra
Salotra
Jambe
Satti
Jawala
Tarphiar
Jojla
The Desí gots or sections in Gurdaspur and Gujrát are :-.
Ahitan, Gurdaspur, Sialkot
Jhanjotri, Gurdaspur
Ajra, Gurdaspur
Maſyar, Gurdaspur
Bharal, Gurdáspur
Mangotri Gurdaspur
Dab, Gurdaspur
Pansotri=Tarkotri, Gurdaspur
Dagoria, Gurdaspur
Suidra, Gurdaspur
Dol, Gurdaspur
Tak, * Gurdaspur
Halbal, *Gurdaspur
Tarkotri, Gurdaspur, cf. Pansotri
In Kapurthala and Amritsar the Mabr-Gola classification appears to be unknown and
the Hindu Kumhár gots are : -
Aku, Kapurthala
Jhalli, Kapúrthala
Athián,
Johr,
Baipal,
Kharl, Amritsar
Balgan, Amritsar
Lehar,
Bhopal,
? Loloh, Kapúrthala
Chirimár, Kapúrthala
Malli, Kapúrthala and Amritsar
Deo, Amritsar
Raindi, Amritsar
Dhab, Kapurthala
Sangar, 19
Dol,
Singu,
Gore,
Sokhal, Kapurthala and Amritsar
Talwandi, Kapúrthala only.
The Muhammadan Desí gots or sections in Jind and Máler Kotla are :-
Agroia, Jind
Kandália, Jind
Dhathrat, »
Kopália.
Dopália,'.,s
Máhíwál, is
Gharelia, »,
Máwál,
Hápsiwal ,
Nagauri,
Jalhány
Od,
1
Janaulia, Máler Kotla
Rohtakí,
Játú, Jind
Sánghwan, ,
Kapania,
Sarao, Máler Kotla
The Multání sections in Nábha, Jind and Máler Kotla are :-
Ahitan, Máler Kotla
Hatthí, Nábba (-obstinate)
Ahnian
„
,
.„ cf. Inhian in Amritsar Jhajrál, Jind
Balúu.
Jhojhrai, Amritsar
Bhatárá. Näbha ?
Khamb, Jind, Khumb, Amritsar
Cháohi, Maler Kotla
Kunjar, Máler Kotla
Chaund,
also in Amritsar, Nakwál, *Máler Kotla
Chand in Nábha
Matkan, Nábha
Chor, Jind
Eáng, † Máler Kotla
Ghodá, Jind
Sokhal,
Ghuen, Máler Kotla, also in Amritsar Sun, #
Ghumman, Nábha
Taggar,
* Nákwál, respected' lit. 'having hair on the nose,' Pers. nák bál
Sáng, = a spear, or mimicry.
Sun, insensible ?



528
Appendices.
APPENDIX I-concluded.
The Muhammadan Kumhár sections in Amritsar and in Kapártbala aro :
Shori, +..
Ay
Phundi
Bashúri
Raidi
Bholawi
Sambalú
Chauhan
Sandar
Dál
Sangar
Dol
Singu
? Hamadpal
Sohai
Jaur
Sul
Kund
Talepial
Loshia
Thot, and in Kapurthala
Loi
Tondhi
Mágar
besides those already specified.
The Muhammadan Desi sections in Bialkot and Gujrát are:- :
Ahitan, Sialkot
Rakkar, Sialkot
Bhambar, Gujrát
Sándar, Gujrát
Bhatti,*.
Satti,*'
Dal, Sialkot
Shákreh
Dol, Gujrát
Janjuá,
Thuthril, »s
Khera, Silikot
Vailu,
Lole, w
The Muhammadan Panjabi sections in Gurdaspur are :
Akku
Kohawa
Balun
Kumbh
Obandal
Pind
? Ghartil
Raj Rah
Gobatar. I
Radiana
Ilahitan.
Sul
Kanan
Sun
Khiwa
The Muhammadan Kumhár sections in Shahpur, Multán, Dora Ghazi Khan and Miáawili
aro:
B(h)ondi Mianwal, said to be oponymous
Lachhoria, Miáowili (oponymous), and
| Dora GLi Khín
Dabwand, Shahpur
Lakhisar, Multan
Dál, Mianwali, oponymous
Millanhans
Dharog, Isa Khel
Mode Khel, Ist Khel
Gane Khel, Isa Khel
Rajráh, Isa Khel
Ihtian, Multan
Sangroha,
Kai-Kalai, Multán; Kaile, Isá Khel.
Bil, Dora Ghi chín,
Katra, Shahpur
Sitha, Multán, Sathú. Is Khel
Kubbar Shábpur
Sokul, Isa Khel
'Villbu,
* Tho Bhatti are said to be so called because they were kaming of the Bhatti land holders :
the Satlí were kaming of the Satti land-holders : and so with all the other sections in Gujrát.
† From Shorkot,
| Said to be also called Mabr.
$From Sangrasi in Baháwalpur ; but cf. Sangar Sangrasi again is said to derivo its name
from Sangroba, an ancient mound in the Cholistán, fortifiod by the Nawabs of Bahawalpur.
In Pesháwar there are said to be two groups --Ohanna and Kathra.



529
Appendices.
APPENDIX J.
SIAL CLANS IN JHANG.
40.
41.
1. Bharwana
Rajáná
Sadhana
Alikhana
Bhojoán
Aliáná
Kauriána
Saliánk
Sargins
10. Umráná
Chúchkána
12. Dawáná
Dhidoáná
14. Ghúghiána
16. Hasnáná
16. Jamiáns
17. Jatiána
18. Kaluana
19, Kirtúáns
20. Kamiáns
21. Khánuản
22. Mighians
23. MÄhni
21. Miráli
25. Sábjhar
26. Sasráná
27. Taharáná
28. Búsláwá
29. Bhudobná
30. Cheld
31. Diraj
32. Daulatáns
33. Dhudhi
34. Gagráná
35. Kbaggá
36. Handláná
37. Hiráj
38. Jabboáná
Jalli Khanand
Laliáná
Machhiáná
Malkáns
Mirjáná
Udhoáná
Patosná
Rajbana
Sanpal
Wijhláná
49. Bagiana
50. Bhojoáná
51. Cbiriáná
52. Dádúáná
53. - Dhaláná
64. Dingá
55. Dhaniáná
56. Ghughiéná
57. Janjiáná
48.



530
Appendices.
APPENDIX K.
SUNAR GOTS.
The Mair gots include :-
Abat, Gujrát, Lahore
Ahi, Lahore
Ajipal, Nábha : -mal, Kapúrthala
Alu, Gujrá!
Ashot, Jind : -at, Kapurthala
Babbar, Jind, Lahore
Babhar, Gujrát
Báchcha, Kapúrthala
Badra, Kapurthala
Bagga, Gujrát, Jiad, Kapúrthala
Baghel, Nábha
Bagri, Gujrát
Bahráwal. Nábha
Bajánia, Jind
Ballan, Lahore
Barare, Jind
Basán, Lahore
Battan,
Beş, Kapúrthala, Jind
Ber, Kapurthala
Bhamb, Gujrat, Jind
Bhashán, Kapurthala
Bbodla, Gujrát
Bhulla, Lahore
Bohr, Gujrát
Brajpal, Nábha
Buland, Gujrát
Buttar, Gujrát and Bunjahi, Jind
Chalagni, Gujrát, -geri, Lahore
? Chhae,
Dabli, Kapurthala
Dahm, Nábha
Dasaur, Jind
Dasamedhia, Jind
Dáwar, Lahore
Dhalla, Gujrát, Lahore, all Hindus
Dhariwal in Ferozepore
Dharma, Gujrát
Dharna, Lahore
Dhuma, Gujrát
Dhuna, Lahore
Dhuona, Jind, Kapúrthala
Dhupar, Jind
Dúr, Kapúrthala
Gajjar, Gujrat
Gand, Jind
Gogar, Gujrát: Guggar in Forozepore
Gogná, Gujrát
Gogte, Kapurthala
Gohngla, Gujrát
Gori, Gujrát
Gund, Lahoro
Gagne, Jind
Hauz Khasai, Gujrát, Khawasi, Lahore
Hira, Gujrát
Jala, Jind
Jah!u, Gujrát
J&lur, Lahore
? Jant Banir
Jaura, Gujrát, J.nd
Jakhar Jhangi in Ferozepore
Kachiyara
Kachhiari, Kapurthala
Kandai, Kanda, Jind, Kapurthala, Lahore
Karor, Gujrát, Ferozepore
Karár, Kapúrthala
Khorma, Nábha
Khurmi, Gujrat, Jind
Karwal. Jind, Lahore
Kakka,
Khepal, Jind
Khungar, Gujrát
Kingar, Lahore
Khich, Lahore
Kunjhai
Khokh
Kandiwal -naul, Gujrát, Kandivaddi, Labore
Kashiați, Jind
Khori, Gujrát, Kapúrthala
? Khurmi, Lahore
Ladhar, Gujrát
Ledha, Lahore
Lodhar Jind
Lodar, Jind, Lahore
Lota, Jind
Malhaddi, Gujrát, Lahore
Main, Lahore
Malpana, Gujrát
Mandhari, Jind
Mannan, Gujrat, Lahore
Masawan, Gujrat, Lahore: -ún, Jind
Maháich. Ferozepore
Maston, Kapurthala
Mitrú, Lahore
Nachal, Jind
Nagora, Gujrát, -ia. Lahore
Nahl, Gujrát: Nál, Lahore
Närnorie, Jind
Nichal, Lahore
Odar, Jínd
Paham, Jind
Pidri, Labore
Pajji,
Phaur, Jind
Partola, Lahore
Pikhi, Jiad
Plaud, Jind
Ranman, Gujrát
Ratta, Lahore
Rode, Gujrat, Jind, Kapurthala
Rodi, Lahore
Rodka, Gujrát
Rudke, Lah?re
Sadl, Jind
Sadhaura, Gujrat, Lahore
Sadeworia, Jind, a.ori, Kapurthala
Sarwana, Lahore
Sarna, Lahore
Salim ?
Shai, Gujrát: Shín, Lahore
Sanderia, Jind
Senh, Jind
Sedba, Jind: .i in Ferozepore
Sida, Qujrát



022
Appendices.
APPENDIX K-continued.
Saida, Kapúrthala i
Tauriwál, Labore
Biri, Gujrát
Thákrán, Ferozepore
Suchchu, Gujrát, Lahore
Turiwal, Kapurthala
Sunák, Lahore : Sunnak, Ferozepore
Udera, Lahore
Sunk, Gujrát: Bank, Kapurthala
Vichcha, Gujrát
Sur, Gujrát, liahore, all Hindus : Jind, 1 Vaid, Lahore
Kapurthala
Waddar, Gujrát
Súsa, Lahore
Wurar-Kokra, Lahore
The gots of the Tank Sunár group are given below :-
I GROUP BAHRI.
(i) In Gujrát :-
(ii) In Mianwali :-
'1. Ajmal, Ajaimal, also in Siálkot and A gásmohla, Akásh. in Lahore
Ferozpore
Azati, Aj. or Ach. = Ohhe-játi in Lahore
2. Gujar, Gijjar, in Biblkog
A hat, in Sialkot and Ferozapore
3. Hachár
Bhobhal, Popal
? Jhothra
Darar, Do..
5. Khich, also in Sialkot and Ferozepore Dhandi, randi
Pajji
Katári-molia(s)s
7. Patru, Batru
8. Rambra
Jhajunga, Jajungha, Japjoga in Lahore
8. Salgotri
Kén
? Samaial
Mangheo
10. Samman,
Rati
Teji
Sami
Thothre, also in Ferozepore
Raltre
Gadi
In Lahore the Bahri include :-
A'bat
Khich
Ajaimal (Ujai)
Kokal
Gidar
Patni
Gijar
Salgotia
Richar
Samánia
Katarmal
Toju
Kann
Below the Bahri in Gujrát rank the Chhezáti, which group comprises 6 gots :-
Ajaimula 3
Also Bahri, apparently.
Mebra
Dhindi
Sanjogi
Kajji
Below the Bahri and Chhezati come tho Bunjahi-nominally with 52 gote :-
(i) In Gujrát, etc.
i -(ü) In Mifswali:
Aia
Ajáti in Peshawar
Ast (Nábha)
Bagri
Babal
Bobal, also in Lahore, Peshawar
Babsi
Basahu
Bhad
Bhagha in Hoshiarpur
Bhamb
Yhandrá
Bhola, also in Lahore
Bhola, Bolaht
* Ninak.panthis by soct.
* Formerly followers of Shah Shams (? Tabriz) of Multán, the Bolah bave now lost faith
in that saint, and for the last 15 years have followed the Jogis. Probably they were follow-
ors of the Agha Khán



Kán
632
Appendices.
APPENDIX K-concluded.
(i) In Gujrát, etc.--eoncld.
(ii) In Mianwali -concld.
Chángli* in Lahore
Dadan
Dagga
Dalál, Nábha
Dangai in Pesháwar
? Dami
Darberai in Pesháwar
Deoki
Dhanna in Fesözepore
Dharna
Dhedi in Peshawar
Dhir
Dhir
Dongia
Gand
Gadar
Giddar
Gora
Gojani in Hoshiarpur
Gond in Peshawar
Itan in Pesháwar
Jagal
Jahıla, Nábba
Jalwar
Jamli
Jauſa
Jhallan
Kakka, Kakki* in Lahore
Kakkal Kanot in Hoshiarpur Kokal
Kashri in Hoshiarpur
Katarmar
Lahura
Luddhart
Lugi in Posháwar
Lukria
Main .
Manga
Manglá
Mattu, Mittu in Lahore
Masáwan, also in Nábha and Miánwsli
Mobra* i 1 Labore
Naká
Ochi in Lahore
Nichal
Padre
Pholu in Hoshiárpur
Radke
Rangar, Ranger in Pesbáwar
? Raoko
Raustya
Rasin in Lahore
Rattan
Ratra in Lahore
Ratti
Rodki in Lahore
Badban
Roda
Sammi in Lahore
Sandhuria -duria, in Lahore
Sandhari in Pesháwar
Shamsi in Pesháwar
Sidha (Nábha)
Sohal
Sur in Ferozepore
Thanda = Panj-jatif in Lahore
Tráma* in Lahore
Udal
Udorai
Viru in Lahore
Waid : also in Peshawar
Mon
Odla
Búsa
NOTE.-In Lahore only those marked* are expressly said to be Bunjabi: N. I. N.Q. II., 167.
None of the Hoshiarpur-gots are expressly said to be Bunjáhi.
† Followers of the Jogis, : 6., Shaiya by cult.
In Lahore the Panj.jati are also said to include tho Batti, Bhopale, Botan and Fanak.



533
Adlike
Abloke
Amlíko
Bazidke
Brahamka
Daryako
Dhol
Gudarke
Hamidke
Hareke
Appendices.
APPENDIX L.
WATTU SECTIONS IN MONTGOMERY.
Izatke
Nejeko
Jasoke
Núreke
Ladhuke
Rahmunke
Laleke
Sadharke
Mahmunko
Salamka
Habtáka
Sandarke
Majhadke
Sarı
Malkana
Shekhuke
Malleke
Sodbeke
Alaneke.
Tejeke
Thákarke
